=== Course Overview 151 ===
In this course, we assume the role of users who work for various types of companies. Each company has its own unique problems that need to be addressed and solved with SAS Visual Analytics. Solving these business problems involves refining data, working with objects, and designing interactive reports. Many different types of data will be used to showcase the features and functionality of Visual Analytics. For a more detailed description of each data source used in this course, see the Data Descriptions resource in this course.
In the first part of this course, we start with a quick introduction to Visual Analytics. In Lesson 1, you will see how to quickly get started building reports using some of the automatic features available, like automatic charts, the Suggest pane, page templates and automatic actions, and see how to quickly create calculated items.
In Lesson 2, we look at the anatomy of the Visual Analytics interface.
Then, in Lesson 3, we describe the various ways in which you can view Visual Analytics reports.
In the next part of the course, we discuss the tools required to create reports.
In Lesson 4, we describe how to refine data for your reports by managing data items, creating hierarchies and custom categories, and working with data views.
We discuss the most frequently-used objects in Lesson 5, including tables, bar charts and time plots. Then, we learn how to create calculated data items in Lesson 6 and impactful objects for creating reports in Lesson 7, including geographic objects, KPI charts and content objects.
Additional objects are covered in Lesson 8, including descriptive, part-to-whole charts, dual-axis charts and time-variant charts.
In Lesson 9, we design interactive reports by learning how to sort, filter and rank, by working with multiple pages, and adding prompts, actions, and links to the report.

=== Welcome to the Course 153 ===
Welcome to SAS Visual Analytics 1 for SAS Viya: Basics. I'm Teri Patsilaras
and I'm Nithin Ramu.
I'm a Senior Manager in the Education division within SAS. Since 2006, I have been working to enable SAS technologists and customers on the latest data visualization techniques and to show them how to leverage SAS Visual Analytics to meet their business needs.
Since 2021, I've been a Technical Trainer in SAS Education, where I've taught courses on SAS Visual Analytics, SAS programming, data preparation, statistics and machine learning. I'm also a course developer for SAS Visual Analytics, which includes writing and updating our courses and preparing customized training.
In this course, you'll learn to use SAS Visual Analytics on SAS Viya to view reports, refine data, work with objects, create display rules, and design interactive reports.
You'll also learn about best practices for designing reports so you can create reports that are both visually compelling and easy to use.
SAS Visual Analytics uses the power of Cloud Analytic Services (CAS) to perform advanced analytic computations on your data at impressive speeds. The secret to this speed is the multi-threaded algorithms used by CAS to process in-memory data. This, coupled with the visual, drag-and-drop interface, means that virtually anyone can create advanced analyses in a fraction of the time it would take using traditional programming methods.
To be a successful business analyst, you'll need to use everything at your disposal to learn about your data quickly and efficiently and create reports that can be shared with anyone, anywhere. SAS Visual Analytics is the perfect tool to help you with this task.
Let's get started!

=== Access SAS Visual Analytics 139 ===
We have two ways that you can access SAS Visual Analytics: using a web browser or using the Progressive Web Application.
Starting with the web browser, you can use Google Chrome, Microsoft Edge, or Mozilla Firefox. You must specify a fully qualified URL, enter credentials to sign in, and this is administered at the environment level by the SAS Administrator.
Next, the Progressive Web Application (PWA) is an individually installed browser application that provides a desktop-like experience. It has application persistence, and by default, your session will never time out. Performance wise, when you install SAS Visual Analytics as a PWA, it initializes faster than when accessed via a web browser. And there is no application browser wrapper, so it is like being in a browser's full screen mode!
After you have signed in, use the Applications menu item Explore and Visualize to access SAS Visual Analytics.
To install the Progressive Web Application, you must first be signed in to the desired application, in this case SAS Visual Analytics. When you are signed in, then you can use the button that appears to install the site as an application. Pro Tip: Name the Progressive Web Application the same name as the SAS product that you are signed in to.
Depending on your browser, you might have to install the Progressive Web Application from a different menu. You can have multiple installations of the PWA, be sure to name the app to reflect the environment it points to.
Use the browser's Manage Apps to uninstall any SAS Progressive Web Applications.

=== Anatomy of the Visual Analytics Interface 553 ===
On the right side of the Home page, we have key actions that we can take on the application bar. You can search for items, view your notifications, access help, update settings, and sign out of SAS Visual Analytics. As you can see when your profile is expanded, if you have additional privileges, you are able to click and view the membership groups that you are a part of. This is especially helpful for administrators who need to test and verify content with and without elevated privileges.
Welcome to the SAS Visual Analytics interface. Let's move in a clockwise circle. The left pane consists of the Data, Objects, Outline, Suggest, and Review panes. I like to think of these panes as the mechanisms to influence the design, composition, structure, and layout of the report. Next, at the top, you can see that we have the report name. And under the report name will be the pages of the report. Then, moving to the right pane, we have the Options, Roles, Actions, Rules, Filters, and Ranks panes. I like to think of these panes as customizing the styling and behavior of the report that can create interactivity and linking. Moving toward the center, we have a button that brings up the available out-of-the-box and custom page templates. And finally, we can see that we are looking at the report canvas for page 1.
Moving in our clockwise circle, starting at the bottom, notice the double less than sign, also called a chevron. The chevron brackets expand and collapse panes. In this case, we are looking at the left pane. Next, we have the vertical ellipsis, or three stacked dots sometimes called the snowman icon. This is called an overflow menu. Here we are looking at the overflow menu for the report Page. Next, we see two arrows in the center of the page and report. These are the report and page prompt areas, and the arrows give you single-click access to expand and collapse. Next is the report overflow menu that provides the actions that you can take on this report. And last is the push pin or thumbtack icon. This enables you to pin or unpin a pane. If you pin a pane, then that means it will remain fixed in the application. If you unpin a pane, that means it floats open and closed as you select buttons on the pane.
The Data pane is the crux of any report. You can add data to the report from available loaded CAS tables, import data from SAS Content or Local files, or select from the Recently Used Data. You can also create new data items and manage data item properties.
The Objects pane provides a list of the table, graphs, containers, and other objects that can be used in a report. The available analytic object groupings will be determined by your SAS license and deployment. You can add an object to the report by dragging, double-clicking, or right-clicking to select a page destination. You can use the Assign data button to quickly assign data roles.
The Outline pane is a great way to view the structure of the report. You can easily see report and page prompts, report pages, and the report objects on each page. Pro Tip: Use the Outline pane to give objects meaningful names or drag objects to new locations.
The Suggestions pane generates objects to help you consider new visualizations for your data. First, a data source must be selected. Then you can use the Refresh and More buttons to generate new suggested objects. The suggested objects are driven by data item cardinality and correlations. You can use the Suggestions pane to learn your data and build reports fast.
The Review pane analyzes the report and categorizes information and findings with recommendations to help improve report performance and accessibility compliance. Issues are categorized as High, Medium, or Low severity. Each type of issue will have different criteria and threshold conditions. Some issues in a report can be detected only when SAS Visual Analytics analyzes the report loading time. To run a review, click the Evaluate Performance link. You can see that if a report takes more than 25 seconds to load, this is considered a high severity issue and the recommended corrective actions should be taken. You can see that next to each issue is a description, and if a report element can be corrected, it is listed. You can use the overflow menus to take action.
You can export a PDF report of all of the issues that were evaluated for the report. To see a full list of thresholds for each issue type, refer to the SAS documentation for SAS Visual Analytics under the Report Review Pane Reference.
The Options pane enables you to specify styling for an object, data colors, frame, and text. Use the drop-down menu at the top to quickly select either the report, page, or object that you want to enhance. The Options pane groups are context sensitive and will automatically update depending on the level selected. You can use the filter to search for an option or group of options.
A data role is a designation that describes how a data item is to be used in an object. The red asterisk indicates that the role is required for the selected object. Data roles are context sensitive and will automatically adjust to the selected object type. After you select an assigned data item, you can use the Select all menu. You can also reorder data items within the same group.
The last panes on the right-hand side include the Actions, Display Rules, Filters, and Ranks panes. The Actions pane is used to direct attention to specific results or understand data within a particular context. The Display Rules pane provides a flexible structure to specify conditions to highlight data in objects. The Filters pane reduces data to explore and analyze for trends and relationships. The Ranks pane reduces the data to make it easier to focus on the top or bottom values of interest.

=== Automatic Charts 034 ===
One of the most powerful features of SAS Visual Analytics is to let it help identify relationships and trends in your data for you. One of those features is to use the automatic chart, which gives a quick view of the data and selects the best chart type. To have SAS Visual Analytics create an auto chart, all you need to do is drag a selection of data items onto the report canvas. Based on the type and number of data items, SAS Visual Analytics will determine the best chart type to view the data. You can always use the object's toolbar to change the object type.

=== Integrated Application and Edit-View Mode 053 ===
Welcome to the updated and improved React interface for SAS Visual Analytics. Over the years, we have combined functionality from our Exploration, Designer, and Viewer code bases into one single code base. This includes improved performance that now loads faster and displays reports more quickly than previous versions of the software.
There is a single user interface to edit and view Visual Analytics reports. Use the pencil icon to toggle between edit and view. By default, all users can create reports. With grant access, users will be able to access CAS data. Using Visual Analytics, users can discover trends and insights in their data. When viewing a report users will be able to select prompt values and interact with report and page links. Users can also export data and images from the report.

=== Lesson Overview 037 ===
To use SAS Visual Analytics, you must first access Visual Analytics by using a supported web browser or web application. Then learning the anatomy of the SAS Visual Analytics interface will help you learn terminology and gain a general understanding of available features. SAS Visual Analytics is an integrated application that combines the power of data exploration, automatic charting and report designing and viewing, all from a single interface. SAS Visual Analytics supports working with multiple open reports and a multi-user environment for collaborative development.

=== Multiple Reports and Multiple Users 120 ===
You can have more than one report open while you are designing your data story. Use the Opened reports link (it lists the number of open reports) in the upper right corner to see a list of the open reports. Click the name of the report that you want to toggle to. Notice that you can even close all reports or use the x next to each report to close individually.
SAS Visual Analytics is a multi-user environment and I want to cover some of the conflict messages that you might see when working in the interface. First is a save conflict. You go to save the report but the system notifies you that the report has been saved by another user. You can choose to overwrite their changes, or you can cancel and select Save As, or speak with your team for clarification. Next is the autosave feature. Somehow your browser or progressive web application session was interrupted before you could save the report. You can choose to use the autosaved version by selecting Yes, or if you select No, it will use the last saved version of the report. This last notification lets you know that your SAS Visual Analytics session was closed without saving and that another user has made changes since. You can choose to use your autosaved report version (which will not include the user's changes) or you can use the updated saved report that the other user initiated.

=== About the Data Pane 231 ===
Let's get to know the Data pane. This is where we add data to the report, import data, and view and edit the data source.
Use the Add data button to select a data source for the report. In the Choose Data window, you can browse through the available data sources that have been loaded in CAS. The drop-down menu enables you to subset between available, favorites, and recent data sources. You can also use the Search to filter available data sources. The search supports free text and faceted such as table name, date modified, date created, or library name. When you have a data source selected, you can view its details or toggle to the Columns tab to see the columns that are included in the data source.
You can, alternatively, choose to import data directly into CAS. With this method, you can import files from your local machine. You can import the following types of data: text files, SAS data sets, and Microsoft Excel workbooks. You might experience long wait-times when you import large local files through a web browser. Accordingly, the CAS Management service option maxFileUploadSize is set to 25,000 megabytes or 25 gigabytes by default, but most browsers have a 4 GB limit.
When you select your file, you will need to provide information about where to load the table into CAS, such as target table name, location, actions to take if target table name already exists, and other file options. To start the import, click the Import item button at the top.
In the data pane, you can add additional data sources to your Visual Analytics report, if needed. It is recommended to have no more than six data sources per report. When you have multiple data sources added to your report, the data source listed is the active data source. The data items in the active data source are listed below. The data items are organized into sections depending on their classification, which is discussed in more detail later. The number next to each category data item is its cardinality, which is the number of unique values of that data item. Frequency and Frequency Percent are data items that Visual Analytics calculates automatically and adds to the Data pane.
There are several other menus available in the Data pane. The topmost is the Data pane menu that controls what data items you see in the Data pane. Below that is the Data source menu. This provides the actions that you can take for data sources.

=== Adding Viewing and Editing Report Data 021 ===
In this lesson, we will be looking at adding, viewing and editing report data. This includes looking at the Data pane and importing data. Next, we will look at how you can view and edit a source table. This includes being able to search, filter, modify, replace, insert and delete data values in a source table.

=== Creating Data Items Fundamentals 041 ===
When working in the Data pane, we have the data items that come with the selected data source, but we also have the ability to create new data items in Visual Analytics called calculated items.
This lesson will cover the fundamentals of creating data items. The Calculated Items and Geography topics will be covered in later lessons, and Parameters will be covered in the SAS Visual Analytics 2 course.
We will learn how to create hierarchies and custom categories in this lesson.
In the data pane, you find the New data item menu that allows you to create new data items to use in the report. Note that the analytic new data items will display according to license and deployment.

=== Custom Categories 300 ===
A custom category allows you to create labels for groups of category or measure data items. Depending on the source data item, you can define a custom category using intervals or the distinct values of the data item. You can also use calculated items as the source.
Custom categories provide similar functionality to a user-defined format (UDF) but without the requirement of having to load the format with the data into CAS.
In this example, the data source has the Facility Opening Date data item. I would like to create a label for the group of facilities that were opened in the 1980s, 1990s, 2000s, and then the newest facilities.
Let's look at how to define a Custom Category Based on a Category data item. In this example, I will right-click Facility Opening Date and select New custom category. Next, I will enter the name of my first value group, Facilities opened in 1980's. Then, I will select the distinct values that I want to be included in this group. Then I will repeat this for any additional value groups. And finally, I will need to determine how to define the remaining values. The Show as is option is available only for data items that are based on string categories. It is not available for numeric or date values. For numeric or date values, I can choose to show the remaining values as missing or I can group them as other and give it a customized name.
Now let's take a look at defining a custom category based on a measure using intervals. I will also use the New data item menu this time and select Custom category. Using this click-path will mean that you will need to select the data item that you want the custom category to be based on. Next, because this is a measure data item, we need to select group by type. In this example, we will select Intervals. Next, we will need to name our Value Group and define the interval of values to be placed in this group. Repeat these steps for the other value groups. Notice the bar chart on the right that will show you your value group names and the distribution of the data item's values. There is also an option to use the Generate groups feature. Here, you can select from Automatic, 5, 10, or 15, or you can manually type the desired number of groups. Note that right now interval values are manually entered and cannot be dynamic yet.
Here is a look at defining a Custom Category Based on a Measure data item but this time using Distinct values. The initial steps to create the custom category are the same, by selecting the New data item menu and clicking Custom category. Next, you have to select the Based On data item. Then this time we will select to group by Distinct values. Name the value group and select the distinct values to be in that group. It is important to note that if you use Distinct Values, for either category or measure based on definitions, new values that appear in the data are grouped with the Remaining Values until added to a Value Group definition.

=== Data Item Properties 501 ===
In the Data pane, once you have selected a data source you will see all of the data items from the data source. Visual Analytics will automatically generate frequency and frequency percent. You can manually create categories, geographies, hierarchies, measures, parameters, and aggregated measures from the new data item menu.
At the top right of the data menu, you can click on the overflow menu. Here, the Show or Hide Data Items window gives you control over what data items you can see in the Data pane. You can hide data items to limit the amount of "noise" for business users, hide underlying data items used in calculations like ISO codes, latitude and longitude, or to limit the available data items shown to users who are viewing the report with Data edits Viewer Capabilities.
When you hover over a data item, it displays several tooltips. It lists the basic data item properties: name which is what we see in Visual Analytics but is actually the label in the data source name in the data source; format; and aggregation. It also gives information about whether the data item is used in data mappings, hierarchies, objects, filters, calculated item, display rules, or ranks.
There are additional tooltips for calculated data items and aggregated measures. The hover over and expanded properties will show the first five lines of the expression definition.
Use the chevrons to expand and collapse the data item properties pane. Note that modifying data item properties will impact all objects that use that data item.
A data item's classification in Visual Analytics provides the rules around how the data item can be used in the report. Data items coming from the raw data source can be a measure, category, or date/datetime. Not all data item classifications can be interchangeable, and a single data item cannot have more than one classification. If you need to use a data item in more than one classification type, then you will need to duplicate the data item to support two classifications.
A measure data item can be changed to a category or geography classification. A category data item can be changed to a geography classification. And a date/datetime data item cannot be changed from its classification.
Note that a data item classification cannot be changed if it is used by one or more report objects.
By default, all measures have a default aggregation of SUM. Use the Aggregation property to modify a measure's default aggregation behavior.
Use the Format property to modify a measure's format.
Visual Analytics has over thirty different local and international currency formats available. Be sure to verify that the format you select is as expected by using the Sample preview in the bottom corner.
SAS treats dates, time, and datetime data items as numbers. SAS uses formats to style the numeric value into what we consider a Julian calendar date or time using a 24-hour or 12-hour clock. A date data item is the number of days since January 1, 1960. A time data item is the number of seconds from midnight of the current day. And a datetime data item is the number of seconds since midnight January 1, 1960.
The available date/datetime formats will depend on the source data's granularity. A SAS datetime is the number of days, seconds, and milliseconds since January 1, 1960. A SAS date format is used to make the number appear as a Julian calendar date.
Note that many periodic calculations require a format that includes a year.
Use the selection boxes to multi-select data items to bulk change classifications, aggregations, and formats.
Use the selection boxes for quick and easy data item multi-selection, and the bottom Clear selection to deselect. The data item overflow menu offers data item actions that can be applied in bulk.
You can also use the data item overflow menu and the Select option to quickly select data items with the same attributes to take actions on, such as selecting all the measures, or all categories, or all measures with the same format or aggregation.
Duplicating data items is the fastest way to create measures with different aggregations or date/datetime data items with different formats. First, you right-click a data item and select Duplicate. Second, expand the data item properties and edit the data item name and format. The newly formatted data item will display in the Data pane.
You can delete only the data items that you create in the report. You cannot delete a raw data source item. Also, you cannot delete a data item if it is used in the report in any manner. If you do not want to see a raw data source item listed in the Data pane, then use the Show or Hide Data Items menu.

=== Data Views 536 ===
This Visual Analytics data view is not the same as a database view, which is a query executed when the table is referenced. In Visual Analytics, after a data source is added to a report, there are often many changes, additions, or modifications that are made to the data source. These changes are tied to a data source and can be saved in what is called a data view. The data view is sharable between users and can be applied to only its associated data source.
The settings that can be stored in a data view are data item settings such as names, formats, classifications, aggregations, data source filters, hierarchies, calculated items, custom categories, duplicate data items, show and hide statuses for data items, unique row identifier selections, and any parameters that the data source depends on.
Let's look at the steps to create a data view. First, make the data source changes that you want to save. In this example, I create a new hierarchy. Second, you must save the data view. Use the Data source menu and select Save data view. Then give your data view a meaningful name and save.
Now let's look at how to apply a data view. Third, you must create a new report. Fourth, select the data source. Fifth, use the Data source menu and select Manage data view. Then select the data view that you want to apply. Sixth, assess the message and select whether you need to decide how to apply each data item in the data view or you can continue applying the data view. Last, you can see that the hierarchy that we saved in our data view has been added to the Data pane.
Here are key data view behaviors to keep in mind. A data source can have more than one data view. You can create one data view per setting change, or you can have many setting changes saved in a single data view. You can add multiple data views per data source. Use caution when applying multiple data views so as not to overwrite any settings accidentally. There is no indication in Visual Analytics to let you know whether a data view has been applied. If there are data item conflicts in the Data pane and the data view being applied, a user interface provides resolution options. In this example, you can see that the hierarchy and MPG (City) (1) were added to the Data pane, but MPG(Highway) was replaced.
If you select the option to decide how to apply each data item with conflicts, then you are presented with this user interface. The data items with conflict are listed and under the How to Apply column, you can choose to add as the listed name (usually the name of the data item with a number in parentheses), ignore the incoming data view data item, add the incoming data view data item, or replace the selected data item with the incoming data view data item. Once you make your selection, you can use the information button to see the settings saved in the data view in the report, and what action applying the data view will take.
A default data view is automatically applied when the data source is added to a report. There are two types of default data views: one, where the default data view is defined by the user and two, where the default data view is defined by the administrator.
Any user can set a user-defined default data view. The default data view is available only to that user. And the default data view is automatically applied when the data source is added to the report. Application administrators can have a user set default data view too! The published data view is available only to application administrators.
In order to define an administrator default data view, the application administrator must publish the data view and edit the Visual Analytics administration settings to set a default data view for the data source. The administrator default data view, unlike the user-set default data view, is automatically applied for all users who add the data source to the report. If there is a conflict, and the user has a user-defined default data view for the same data source, then the user default data view overrides the default data view set by an administrator.
Only an application administrator can publish a data view. A published data view becomes available for other users to apply. This is how you can share data views across users.
To manage a default data view for all users, you must be signed in as an application administrator. The data view that you want to set as default must also be published. From the Visual Analytics report, use the report menu to select Edit administration settings. Then click the Default Data View tab. From there you need to select the data source and then the desired data view. Remember, a default data view set by the user overrides the default data view set by the administrator.
Why use data views? They can quickly and easily provide Data pane settings to assist business users. Data views can also save you time from making repetitive calculated items, aggregated measures, and so on.
Here are some considerations to keep in mind: A data view is not intended to be a fully robust semantic layer, but it can help with some business logic. Also, data views are a point-in-time Data pane setting update. If you make a change to the data view, those changes are not pushed out to reports that have that data source with the data view applied. You cannot transfer a data view to a different data source, even though it might be similar.

=== Hierarchies 231 ===
A hierarchy is a defined arrangement of category data items based on a parent-child relationship. In many cases, the levels of the hierarchy are arranged with more general information at the top (Year) and more specific information at the bottom (Month).
You are able to mix data item types in a hierarchy definition. Hierarchies that consist of all geographic data items are considered geographic hierarchies and can be used in geo maps. Hierarchies enable you to add drill-down functionality to graphs and tables.
One of the most powerful features of Visual Analytics is that you can create hierarchies on the fly!
Here are three different objects that have a hierarchy data role assignment. We can see in the Crosstab object the Year -- Quarter -- Month levels. Notice how you can expand the different levels individually. The Crosstab object has additional navigation features like expand all, collapse all, and drill.
Next is the Bar chart object. There are breadcrumbs at the top to navigate back up the hierarchy, but you select the underlined values to move down in the hierarchy.
Last is the Geo bubble object. We won't cover how to create the geographic data items in this lesson, but when you create a hierarchy of all geographic data items, you can use the geographic objects. Double-clicking the bubble will drill down the hierarchy, and you use the breadcrumbs at the top to navigate back up the hierarchy.
To create a hierarchy, use the New data item menu and select Hierarchy. Then browse the available data items and move over the selected items by either double-clicking or using the center arrows. You can reorder the data items using the side arrows. The New Hierarchy window will generate a name based on the selected data items. If you edit the name, then the auto-naming feature will be disabled. When you click OK, the defined hierarchy will appear in the Data pane.
You can easily create a date or datetime hierarchy by right-clicking a date or date/time data item and selecting "New date hierarchy". You can see that the date hierarchy is created and added to the Data pane. If you right-click and edit the hierarchy, you can see the auto-generated levels and make any desired edits. The generated levels will depend on the granularity of the data item used to generate the date hierarchy.
Note that the auto-generated date or datetime data items are hidden by default. To make them visible, simply use the Data pane's overflow menu to unhide the desired data items.

=== Lesson Overview 055 ===
Before you can begin creating effective reports, you need to refine your data. You can do this by viewing or editing the source table, managing data items, creating new data items, working with data sources, and by sorting, filtering, and ranking the data.
Add data to the report, then view and edit your data source to verify the data values and perform last-minute updates.
Manage your data by modifying data item properties (like classifications, formats, and aggregations) and view details about the data (like insights, outliers, and related measures) to ensure the data is formatted appropriately for your report.
You can create new data items (like hierarchies and custom categories) that are necessary for the analysis.
In addition, you can manage data sources (with data views) and remove, replace, refresh, or map data to quickly create insightful visualizations.

=== Managing Data Items 024 ===
In this lesson, we will be talking about managing data items in Visual Analytics. This includes looking at the Data pane (which is on the left) and data roles (which is on the right) but more specifically about data item properties, data item classification, and formats. We will also look at how Visual Analytics helps identify insights, related measures, and outliers.

=== Map Data Sources 055 ===
To support interactive reports that include actions and links with multiple data sources, you need to map data sources. Using the data source menu to define the mapped data applies across the entire report. These mappings support automatic and manual actions, which are discussed later in the course.
In this example, I have CARS_SPECS as the active data source, and I select to map data from the data source menu. We can see CARS_PRICING listed in the Data Source Mapping user interface. Use the plus to add data items to the mapping. You can have as many data item mappings as you need. The data item formats must match to work. You can use the toolbar to delete all if needed. This data source mapping can be seen in use here as filtering. In this example, the button bar is being sourced by CARS_SPECS, but both objects are filtered because of the data source mapping.

=== Related Measures Outlier and Insights 308 ===
SAS Visual Analytics has many features to help you identify relationships in your data. The curve and point icon indicates that an item has related measures. This icon appears next to measures when a measure data item is selected and there is a strong degree of correlation (plus or minus 0.6 or higher). You must first select a data item. In this example, I selected Cylinders and we can see the hover over details for MPG (Highway). In this next example, I have selected Invoice, and I hover over Horsepower for the correlation details.
There are data thresholds for the related measures feature. If the data has fewer than 56 rows of data, then the correlation threshold increases to avoid the likelihood of random correlations. Also, if the data has more than 150 measures, then the related measures are not detected but can be configured in the SAS Environment Manager. You can also, as a personal setting, choose to disable the automatic correlation detection for the Data pane.
Outlier detection runs against all measures automatically to check for outlier values. The outlier detection icon (with four dots) indicates that an item has outlier values. The hover over displays general outlier information. You can also right-click and select View outlier details. You can use your personal settings to disable automatic outlier detection for the Data pane.
This is the outlier details report. At the top is a box plot of the outlier values for that measure. Then it has a detailed list table of outlier values and related measures. And at the bottom is an impact assessment that quantifies the effect of outlier values.
Insights are analyzed at the report level. The light bulb enclosed in a circle appears when insights have been automatically detected. Only data items used in the report content are analyzed.
There is a report option to disable insights when in View mode. There are also personal performance settings that you can select if you would like the Insight mode in editing or viewing to be automatic or manual.
When you click the Insights icon, a list of data items used in the report will display next to an information icon that displays the same outlier details available from the Data pane. The View outlier analysis link displays a detailed report of how this data item is used in the report.
Selecting Analyze Objects for Impact generates a detailed outlier impact analysis for every measure-object combination in the report. Here you can see that for this Cars report, MPG(CITY) is used in three objects. Use the Details link to view the report.
Here are the three outlier-object-specific reports for MPG(CITY). This follows the same structure for the box plot and list table. However, the third object will vary between a List table or Crosstab object depending on the type of report object and other data roles assigned to the object. Ultimately, using these outlier detail reports can help you determine how outliers are impacting your report and whether any action needs to be taken depending on your business needs.

=== Remove Replace and Refresh Data 127 ===
If you no longer need a data source, you can remove it from the report. This removes the data source from the report, removes its associated data items from the data pane, and removes associated objects from the report.
You can also directly replace a data source with another one. All objects associated with the old data source are automatically remapped to use the new data source if the same data item name exists. If a data item that is used in the report is not present in the new data source, you can specify a replacement data item from the new data source.
When replacing a data source, if any item in the old data source does not exist in the new data source, you are prompted to choose how to handle this conflict. You can choose to ignore this, in which case any objects that use the missing data item will display an error. Alternatively, you can replace the missing data item with another data item. Select this option if the missing data item has another name in the new data source.
Lastly, you can refresh a data source. This will reload the data and metadata from the CAS server. This can be useful if the data source changes while you are editing the report. It automatically reruns queries for all objects using the refreshed data source. Note that if the refreshed data source is missing some data items, these data items will continue to appear in the data pane. You can delete them manually. However, objects using the missing data items will display an error.

=== Using the Source Table Viewer 618 ===
You can view and edit the source table for a data source in a Visual Analytics report. This is only available for CAS source tables. You cannot view aggregate data sources or joined data sources. This feature requires additional permissions for the user to access the view source table menu item.
You can use the view and edit source table feature to make last minute data value edits for small to medium datasets. With the data viewer: You can view raw CAS tables in a very high-performance interface designed with low load times and minimal delay. You can search for and find values with simple and advanced search features. This is great for confirming if certain values exist in your data. You can filter your data down to view only specific rows. This works with both simple and compound conditions. You can copy data from cells or even entire columns with their header into other applications for additional analysis. You can export your data to Excel or CSV for additional analysis or using it in other applications. You can customize your view by rearranging, sorting, changing formats, pinning columns, and more.
While editing tables, you can modify or paste values, column names, labels or adding an index. This gives you easy access to last-minute data wrangling or last-minute touches.
You can replace values in bulk. If a value is incorrect, you can change it without needing to leave Visual Analytics.
You can remove leading or trailing blanks. These can be difficult to find, especially if you have imported data that has not been preprocessed. The data viewer-editor makes quick work of this. You can change the case of variables. You can set variables to upper or lower-case in bulk. You can insert and delete both rows and columns. If you have erroneous rows or columns that are not needed, you can remove them. One benefit is improved performance from a smaller table. You can govern who has edit access to allow only the right people access to edit raw data. By default, this is off.
If the source table contains any data that you are not authorized to view, then that data will be excluded when you save the table.
Access the data viewer through the data source menu in the data pane. Users can only view or edit the tables that they have permission to access in the environment. By default, Authenticated Users can view source tables and Application Administrators can view and edit source tables. Administrators can change permissions using the SAS Environment Manager. If row-level security is enabled, you only see the rows you have access to.
When viewing the table, you can customize the view by dragging the columns to reorder, show or hide columns, use the toolbar menu on a column to pin columns, sort a column by ascending or descending order and change the format of a column. You can also easily undo all sorts and filters, and switch between displaying the column names, labels, or both.
You can toggle to column view when viewing tables with a large number of columns known as a wide table. Here, you can show hidden columns and filter for columns by name. You can hide unnecessary columns from table view and move columns to change the order in which they appear in table view.
With table viewer, you can easily check whether specific values exist in your table, or in a specific column and replace values. To search the entire table, use the search bar at the top right. Click the binoculars for advanced search options. To focus the search on a specific column, right-click on a column header and click on the filter icon to build a simple or compound filter. Lastly, to filter and replace values, right-click on a column header to open the column toolbar menu. Select replace and then choose between a case sensitive or insensitive search and if to match only whole words. Then you can define a replacement value for either individual observations or replace all.
From the column toolbar menu, you can insert a blank column, move a column, or delete a column. You can also change the values in a column to lower or uppercase, remove leading and/or trailing spaces in a column's values. From the View and edit properties menu item you can change the name, label or format of a column by editing its properties. In the column properties window, you can also add an index to a column. This will speed up sorting and filtering that column.
Double-click to edit a single cell. You can undo and redo edits. You can also select a range of cells, right-click to copy the selection and paste using the keyboard shortcut CTRL V. You can also insert new rows and delete rows.
When you have finished with your edits, you can save the table. You must have write permission to the save location. Saving as a different name will create a copy of the table and saving as the same name will overwrite the table in-memory as well as the copy on disk. From the toolbar menu, you can discard the view changes, refresh the data, and with export authorization you can export the data to CSV or Excel.
Let's review some important considerations regarding size, permissions, and row-level security when using the view and edit source table feature. If your data has greater than or equal to 150,000 rows, 10,000 columns or 5 million cells then the source table is larger than the in-memory threshold and there are limited find capabilities, no data exporting, and no data editing available. A message will appear if the table is too large.
By default, Authenticated Users can view all source tables they have access to. Application Administrators can view and edit all source tables they have access to. To edit these permissions, use these governing URIs in the SAS Environment Manager to make changes. Err on the side of caution when granting edit permission since the save does not push back to the original source table location, only to the in-memory CAS table and on disk copy.
If you have CAS tables with row-level security, ensure that it is secured from editing and saving. If a user has limited row access to a table, edits the table, and then overwrites it, the table will be overwritten only with their visible rows.

=== Working with Data Roles 334 ===
Now let's get to know the Data Roles pane. We use this pane to specify how a data item is used in a report object. It lets us know which roles are required and which are optional. And this pane is context sensitive. That means the available roles will be determined by the type of report object selected.
To assign data items to an object, you can use either the Assign data button or the Data Roles pane directly. If you use the Data Roles pane, use Add to select from a list of subsetted data items. Only the appropriately classified data items will be available to select from. If no roles have been assigned, you can select the report data source to use. If you use the Assign data button, then a similar Add button appears and you make your data item selections in a similar manner.
You can also drag data items from the Data pane to either the Data Roles pane or the object itself. If you drag the data item to the object, a pop-up will appear for you to select which role it is to be assigned.
To delete or remove a data role assignment, right-click the data item. You can remove the data item from the role assignment, remove all data items from all role assignments, or move the data item to another role. Use the delete (trash can) icon to delete a data item from the role.
Click and drag the data item to reorder within the data role. You can also drag a data item to a role that doesn't have an assignment if the classification and role are compatible.
A data-driven lattice is a multi-cell graph whose values are determined by the category data role assignment. A lattice column adds a by group to the columns and a lattice row adds a by group to the rows. Not all objects support lattice data roles.
The animation role requires a date/datetime classification data item. The object will animate the data over the assigned data role.
Note that the animation toolbar is not fully accessible to screen reader users, so consider including a note in a text object near the graph with animation telling users that by maximizing the object, they can access the table that contains the same data.
The Data Role for data tip values controls what is displayed in the over hover for data points in the report object. Typically, any data item assigned to the object is included, but you can delete the automatically added data items. You can also add additional category or measure data items, like I added Predicted Sales and Difference, provided that including those data items does not increase the number of returned rows in the query. You can also drag and drop to change the order.
The hidden data role enables you to include a data item in the query results when you want to use its values but do not want the data item displayed. The hidden data role can be used to help define color-mapped display rules, external links, and mapping data sources.
Notice in this example that I have three data items assigned to the columns role, and I have my URL data item assigned to the hidden role. Notice that the List table object that returned data is not fully aggregated. We can see that because we have multiple values for Region East and Product Type Office.
Expanding this example, at the top we can see the detailed data and the default aggregation next to it. At the bottom, we can see that I've now included the URL data item where it is both visible and hidden. In this example, I would create an external link using the hidden URL data item.

=== Working With Data Sources 019 ===
In this lesson, we use the Data pane to work with and create data sources in our SAS Visual Analytics report. We will cover data views and map data sources. Additional topics such as creating an aggregate data source and data joins are covered in the SAS Visual Analytics 2 course.

=== Bar Chart Objects 017 ===
SAS Visual Analytics has different types of bar charts that are useful for making comparisons. Bar chart objects are located in the Graphs group in the Objects pane and include bar charts, targeted bar charts, dot plots, needle plots, and butterfly charts.

=== Bar Charts 125 ===
Bar charts are useful for making general comparisons, presenting rankings, describing how parts relate to the whole, and showing questionnaire results. Bar charts display aggregated data for the distinct values of a category. They are probably one of the most versatile, and most used, graphs available. When using bar charts, it's a best practice to use a zero baseline. This is typically assumed and can lead to misinterpretation or tend to skew the understanding of the chart if a zero baseline is not used. A needle plot can be used to compare values to some baseline other than zero, or a dot plot could be used to highlight the difference between values that are close together.
NOTE: By default, a bar chart is sorted in descending order by the value of the first measure. For a grouped bar chart, the data is sorted by the category values in alphabetical order. Sort order can be changed by right-clicking the chart, selecting Sort, choosing the data item, and selecting Ascending or Descending.
Bar charts can contain groups, use lattice columns and rows, display animation, and support the hidden data role. Options are available for changing the direction, the spacing, and the transparency of the bars, specifying the grouping style (clustered or stacked) and the group scale (actual values or normalize groups to 100%), adding and modifying labels, and abbreviating numeric values.

=== Butterfly Charts 048 ===
Butterfly charts (also known as tornado charts) are useful for general comparisons, specifically for comparing two opposing groups (like loyalty and non-loyalty members, citizens and residents, or dogs and cats). It displays two sets of bars (one for each measure) with a shared category axis, where the baselines for the two bar charts are in the center of the chart and the ranges of the measure axes are identical. Depending on your data structure, you might need to create calculated data items that contain the measures for each group.
Butterfly charts support the hidden data role. Options are available for each group of bars and enable you to specify the baseline, change the spacing and the transparency of the bars, add and modify data labels and segment labels, and abbreviate numeric values.

=== Comparative Time Series Plots 117 ===
Comparative time series plots are useful for identifying anomalies in two separate time series. The comparative time series plot displays two time series in parallel with a shared horizontal time axis and separate vertical axes.
Comparative time series plots require a date or datetime data item for the Time axis and two measures (one for time series 1 and one for time series 2). Additionally, comparative time series plots can include data tip values and support the hidden data role. Options are available for each time series and enable you to specify the binning interval (Automatic, Fixed count, or Use format), the transparency of the line, the grouping style (Overlay unfilled, Overlay filled, or Stack filled), and the line thickness. Additional options are available for adding markers, abbreviating numeric values and adding and modifying data labels. For the binning interval, you can select Automatic (which enables Visual Analytics to automatically determine the best interval for the plot), Fixed count (which plots a number of equally spaced values determined by the value entered for Fixed bin count), and Use format (which will use the format of the date data item to specify the interval).

=== Crosstabs 515 ===
Another great object for learning about your data is the crosstab (also known as a crosstabulation table). This object is especially useful for viewing distinct values for category data items and summary information for your measures. Crosstabs often have two or more categories assigned to both the rows and columns, forming a matrix. The crosstab can also be helpful in spotting data quality issues and for gaining a broader insight into your data. Generally, crosstabs can be easier to read than list tables because they use less space, group values together, and can use hierarchies. When you use a crosstab, it's recommended that categories with lower cardinality (that is, categories with few distinct values) be placed in the Columns role and categories with higher cardinality (that is, categories with many distinct values) be placed in the Rows role. This enables users to quickly and easily read the table without a lot of scrolling.
Crosstabs accept columns (displayed at the top of the crosstab), rows (displayed on the left side of the crosstab), and measures (displayed as aggregated values in the cell). Options are available for adding and modifying borders, using abbreviated numerical values for each measure column, applying the indented layout (which displays subtotals for each group), modifying the color and format for row headings and column headings, specifying the placement, color, and format for measure headings, showing missing labels as blanks, and fitting columns to the width of the crosstab based on the space available.
For cells, additional options are available for adding horizontal and vertical lines, including row numbers, providing an optional customized heading, restarting row numbers for each group, condensing the row height to remove extra white space in rows, and modifying the background color and alternating the background color of the cells.
When working with crosstabs, you might want to resize columns, rearrange columns and rows, sort by categories or measures, and create and add hierarchies or calculations. You can resize columns to improve the readability of the data by ensuring that data values are not cut off and by reducing the amount of white space. To resize columns, click on the edge of a column heading and drag to the left or right to resize.
You can rearrange columns to more easily view related data items. To rearrange columns, you can use the Roles pane to drag the column to a new position in the list of columns.
You can sort by measures or categories in a crosstab to display the values in a logical order. By default, the crosstab is sorted in ascending order by the categories. You can modify the sort by right-clicking the crosstab heading, selecting Sort, and selecting the data item and order of the sort. Alternatively, you can click another column heading in the table to change the sort. Clicking once sorts by that column in ascending order, and clicking twice sorts by the column in descending order.
When two or more category data items are assigned to the Columns or Rows roles, you can create and add a hierarchy from the crosstab. This enables you to expand and drill down to view different levels of the hierarchy. To create and add a hierarchy, right-click a category heading and select Create and add hierarchy to rows or Create and add hierarchy to columns.
A new hierarchy is created (using the names of data items in that role), is added to the Data pane (for use in other graphs) and is assigned to the roles of the crosstab. When a hierarchy is added to a crosstab, you can expand a single level by clicking the Expand button. Alternatively, you can drill down to view more details about that level by clicking the data item. When you are drilled down into a hierarchy, a ribbon that indicates the current position is displayed at the top of the crosstab and can be used to navigate between levels.
You can create derived data items (percent of totals and percent of subtotals) for measure data items assigned to the crosstab. These derived data items enable you to compare values between and across groups and can be used only with crosstabs. Percent of column total displays the percentage that each cell contributes to the column total, and Percent of row total displays the percentage that each cell contributes to the row total. In this example, Percent of column total for Product Sale displays how much each country contributes to the total for all countries. This means that the percentages add up to 100% for the column.
Percent of column subtotal displays the percentage that each cell contributes to the column group, and Percent of row subtotal displays the percentage that each cell contributes to the row group. In this example, Percent of column subtotal for Product Sale displays how much each country contributes to the total for each continent. This means that the percentages add up to 100% for each continent.
To create a derived data item, right-click the measure column in the crosstab and select Create and add calculation. Options are available for naming the derived data item and for selecting the type of data item. The types available depend on the data items assigned to the Columns and Rows roles.

=== Data Roles 308 ===
Many objects have similar roles: some roles are required, and others are optional. Many roles are standard, but some roles have special uses, like the Lattice rows and Lattice columns roles, the Data tip values role, the Animation role, and the Hidden role.
A lattice is a multi-cell graph in which the plot in each cell represents a specific crossing of values. In Visual Analytics, you can create a multi-cell graph by assigning data to the Lattice rows and the Lattice columns roles. In this example, Order Type is assigned to the Lattice columns role, so one column appears for each order type. Loyalty Member is assigned to the Lattice rows role, so one row appears for each type of loyalty member. This role is useful for comparing data across multiple groups.
A data tip displays details about an element. In Visual Analytics, you can add additional details about an element by assigning data items to the Data tip values role. By default, all data items assigned to other roles will be added to the Data tip values role. In this example, two data items (Average Efficiency and Number of Facilities) are assigned to the Data tip values role, so the aggregated values for those data items appear when the user places the mouse pointer over a bar. This role is great for providing additional information to the report viewer without having to assign the data to the object itself.
Data items assigned to this role can be categories, dates, measures, aggregated measures, or some combination of these. A category data item should be assigned to the Data tip values role only if doing so will not increase the number of rows in the query. For example, suppose I have a bar chart that shows profit by Continent. Adding Country to the Data tip values role will increase the number of rows returned from the query and produce unintended results. You can change the order in which data items appear in the data tip by reordering the data items on the Data Roles pane.
Animation enables you to view changes in data over time. In Visual Analytics, you can animate a chart by assigning a date data item to the Animation role. In this example, Transaction Month is assigned to the Animation role. When a data item is added to this role, a toolbar appears at the bottom of the chart that enables you to play the animation and the date value is displayed in the graph by default. Multiple options can be modified to control the appearance of the animation values. When using animations, be sure to focus on changes that are different from the norm.
The Hidden role enables you to include a data item in query results when you want to use the values, but you don't want to display the data in the chart. Data items assigned to this role are available for color-mapped values, external links, and mapping data sources.
A data item should be assigned to the Hidden role only if doing so will not increase the number of rows in the query. The Hidden role is not available for all objects and is not intended for column-level security purposes. You cannot assign a data item to the Hidden role and the Data tip values role at the same time.

=== Dot Plots 051 ===
Dot plots are useful for general comparisons. Dot plots display data for each value of a category data item using dots. The position of each dot on the response axis represents the summarized value of the measure. Because dot plots often use a nonzero baseline, it's easier to highlight differences when values are close together.
Dot plots minimize the amount of chartjunk displayed. Chartjunk is any visual elements in graphs that are not necessary to understand the graph or that distract from the main message of the graph. Dot plots are often preferred over bar charts because bar charts can distort the values if the area of the bars is compared and not the height.
Dot plots can use lattice columns and rows and support the hidden data role. Options are available for changing the transparency, the size, and the fill of the markers.

=== General Options Layout 041 ===
The last general option is Layout. Layout options include width and height.
Both the width and height of the object are expressed as a percentage of the space on the canvas or inside a container. By default, SAS Visual Analytics automatically computes the height and width of any control or text object when the report is rendered to increase portability across various screen sizes. For these objects, you should specify a fixed height and width only if you want the object to use that specified size on any screen. In addition, you can choose to extend the height and width if space is available or shrink the height and width of an object if there isn't sufficient space.

=== General Options Object 304 ===
All objects have general options (like Object, Style, and Layout).
Object options include Name, Title, Alternative text, Enable selection in the viewers, Override system data limit, and Periodically reload object data.
The Name option enables you to specify a name for the object. This name is used to identify the object in the Outline pane, in the drop-down list at the top of the right pane, and in the Actions pane. All names in a report must be unique.
The Title option enables you to specify whether no title, an automatic title, or a custom title appears above the object in the canvas. If you select Custom title, you can specify your own title. The font, size, and color of the title cannot be modified in the Options pane. Instead, double-click the title in the canvas to edit the title using the rich text window.
The Alternative text option enables you to specify text that a screen reader will announce when a user selects the object. This option has no effect for text objects, drop-down list controls, list controls, or automated explanation objects.
The Enable selection in the viewers option controls whether the selection outline and the object toolbar are displayed when the report is viewed in SAS Visual Analytics or the mobile app. When enabled, the object toolbar is displayed in the upper right corner of the object when users view the report. If disabled, the overflow menu will not appear when users view the report, but users can access the same options from the right-click menu. By default, this option is selected for all tables, graphs, geo maps, and analytics objects, but not selected for most controls (excluding the list control), most containers (excluding the prompt container), text, image, and web content objects.
The Override system data limit option enables users to override the system configuration property only for this object instance. This can be useful if you want to increase the default client-side threshold for an object on a case-by-case basis. Suppose, for example, you would like to display a list of all your customers in a table. The default client-side threshold for list tables is 40,000 rows, but you have almost 70,000 customers. If you would like to see a list of all your customers, you can modify this option for the list table to 70,000 to see the entire list of customers. However, you should be cautious when overriding these values as changes will directly impact performance.
The Periodically reload object data option enables users to specify the interval in which an object's data should be refreshed. You can specify the refresh interval in seconds or minutes. This is useful if you have data that updates frequently or if the report includes a job that updates the underlying CAS table. Be aware that the data will be reloaded only when the report is being viewed. This means you must toggle out of Editing the report and view the report to verify that the reload is working correctly.

=== General Options Style 404 ===
Now let's look at the Style options.
Style options include Font, Background, Border, Padding, Internal padding, Data Skin, Fill, Line/Marker, Gradient, Missing, Data Tip Style, and Data Tip Background. These options available are context sensitive. That is, they depend on the selected object.
The Font option specifies the font used for all text in the object. This includes axis labels, tick values, data labels, and data tip values. It's a best practice to use consistent fonts in your reports, so it's recommended to choose a font at the report level and not modify the fonts for individual objects.
The Background option enables you to specify the color and transparency of the background for the object. Because you should not overuse colors in your report, it's recommended to use a neutral color (like white) and modify the background color only in special circumstances.
The Border option adds a border around the object and enables you to specify the thickness and transparency of the border. Borders are typically considered chartjunk, a visual element in a graph that is not necessary to comprehend the data presented in the graph. To increase the comprehension and improve the effectiveness of your report, borders should be avoided.
The Padding option specifies the amount of empty space to include around the outside of the object. Margins and padding can be used to add negative space to your report, which can increase the impact of your report. However, be aware that too much padding can crowd report content, especially when users view the report on small screens or set the zoom level above 100%. If you modify padding from the default, test the report thoroughly to ensure that the content is displayed nicely on all screen sizes. For objects that contain multiple visuals (like the Automated explanation, Automated prediction, and Text topics objects), the Internal padding option specifies the amount of empty space to display between those visuals.
The Fill option specifies the order in which colors are assigned to fills for each unique group in the chart. For example, a bar chart with three groups will use the first color (blue) for the first group, the second color (yellow) for the second group, the third color (purple) for the third group, and so on. If there is no data item in the Group role, then only the first color is applied to the graph.
To change a specific color, select that color and choose a different option. Choose complementary colors as they are pleasing to the eye when used side by side and help improve accessibility, especially for users who are color blind. The default palette choices in Visual Analytics cycle through warm and cool colors for this purpose.
The Line/Marker option specifies the order in which colors are assigned to lines and markers for each unique group in the chart. If your chart contains both fills and lines, it's recommended to choose a similar color for each group. The default palette choices in Visual Analytics use similar colors for fills and lines.
The Gradient option specifies the colors that make up the color gradients in the chart. When working with gradients, be aware that three-color gradients are generally not accessible to people with color-deficient vision. Instead, choose colors with a sufficient difference in luminosity.
The Missing option specifies a color that represents missing values in a data item assigned to the group role.
The Data skin option specifies the visual style of the data elements in the object. You can choose the default, none, pressed, sheen, crisp, gloss, matte, or flat. It's a best practice to choose only one data skin per report and apply it to all objects for consistency.
The Data tip style option enables you to specify the font size and color of the text in data tips and the Data tip background option enables you to select the color of the background of data tips. Remember, as a best practice, all text should use consistent fonts and sizing, and you should not overuse colors.

=== Graph Options Animated Graphs 154 ===
For animated graphs, additional options are available for controlling the animation value displayed in the chart. Animation options include Animation date or time value, Placement, Order, Text Size, Text Style, Transparency, Contrast option, and Fill color. When using animations in graphs, be sure to focus on changes that are different from the norm.
The Animation date or time value option, when selected, displays the date or time value for the time period displayed in the chart. When the animation is playing, this value is constantly updated.
The Placement option specifies the position of the animation value in the chart. The animation can be placed in the upper, middle, or bottom left, the upper, middle, or bottom center, or the upper, middle, or bottom right. It's a best practice to place the animation value where it will not overlap with data elements. This position can depend on the data in the graph.
The Order option specifies whether the animation value is displayed in front of data elements or behind data elements. The Text Size option enables you to modify the size of the animation value as a percentage of the height of the object. The Text Style option enables you to change the style (bold or italicized) and color of the animation value. The Transparency option enables you to change the transparency of the animation value. The Contrast option enables you to specify whether the animation value appears with a colored background (Box) or without one (None).
If you choose to display a colored background for the animation value, the Fill color option enables you to choose the color of that background. Because you should not overuse colors in your report, it's recommended to use a neutral color (like white) and modify the background color only in special circumstances.

=== Graph Options Axis 251 ===
Most graph objects have axis options (like X Axis Options and Y Axis Options) and graph options (like Graph Frame, Reference Lines, Legend, and Data Options).
Axis options are the same for the x and y axes and include Rotate value label, Overview axis, Fixed minimum, Fixed maximum, Logarithmic scale, Axis label, Axis line, and Tick values. The options available are context sensitive. That is, they depend on the selected object.
The Rotate value label option enables you to display category tick values at an angle, so more labels are shown. This option has no effect if a lattice is used in the graph.
The Overview axis option enables you to add an overview axis to the chart. The overview axis is a scrolling axis that can be modified to control how much of the axis appears in the main view and which segment of the axis appears. This option has no effect if a lattice is used in the graph. Because overview axes are not accessible, you should avoid adding these to your reports.
The Fixed minimum and Fixed maximum options enable you to specify a fixed range for the axis. Fixed axis ranges can be useful for accessibility, because they enable users of sonification to understand the scale of data shown in the object. This is especially useful when the values shown in the object can change due to filtering or drilling down in a hierarchy. However, if your data updates frequently or is likely to fall outside the fixed range when filtering or drilling, a fixed axis range is not recommended as values can unknowingly fall outside the fixed range.
The Logarithmic scale option enables you to specify that the axis uses a logarithmic scale. This is especially useful for viewing relationships when your data has outliers where the largest numbers in the data are hundreds or even thousands of times larger than the smallest number. The logarithmic scale preserves the order of the observations while making the outliers seem less extreme, which makes it easier to see the relationship between all points.
The Axis label option enables you to modify the label for the axis. You can display or hide the label and specify the font size, the text style, and the color.
The Axis line option enables you to modify the axis line. You can display or hide the line and specify the width and the color.
The Tick values option enables you to modify the values displayed along the axis. You can display or hide the values and specify the font size, the text style, and the color.
Recall that it's a best practice to use consistent fonts and avoid chartjunk, all the visual elements that are not necessary to comprehend the information presented in the graph. This can include tick marks, grid lines, or unnecessary labels.

=== Graph Options Data Options 012 ===
Next is the Data Options. In the Data Options group, the Combine excluded into "All Other" option creates another group (All Other) when ranks are applied to the chart.

=== Graph Options Graph Frame 058 ===
Now, let's look at Graph Frame options.
Graph Frame options include Wall background, Grid lines, and Lattice heading background.
The Wall background option enables you to specify the color and transparency of the background graph wall, the area bounded by the graph axes. Because you should not overuse colors in your report, it's recommended to use a neutral color (like white) and modify the background color only in special circumstances.
The Grid lines option enables you to modify the gridlines in the chart. You can display or hide gridlines and specify the thickness and the color. Grid lines are typically considered chartjunk--a visual element in a graph that is not necessary to comprehend the data presented in the graph. To increase the comprehension and improve the effectiveness of your report, grid lines should be avoided.
The Lattice heading background option specifies the color and transparency of the background of the heading for charts that use a lattice.

=== Graph Options Legend 120 ===
Now let's look at Legend options. Legend options include Visibility, Placement, Background style, and Border.
The Visibility option specifies whether the legend appears in the report (On) or whether it is hidden (Off). In some cases, Visual Analytics will collapse the legend to conserve space. If the legend does not appear in full size, it can be viewed only when the user activates the collapsed button. This button does not have an accessible name or role, so it is not announced by screen readers. To ensure that your reports are accessible, you should verify that the legend is displayed on all screen sizes.
The Placement option specifies the position of the legend in the object.
The Background style option enables you to specify the color and transparency of the background of the legend. Because you should not overuse colors in your report, it's recommended to use a neutral color (like white) and modify the background color only in special circumstances.
The Border option adds a line around the legend and enables you to specify the thickness and transparency of the border. Borders are typically considered chartjunk--a visual element in a graph that is not necessary to comprehend the data presented in the graph. To increase the comprehension and improve the effectiveness of your report, borders should be avoided.

=== Graph Options Reference Lines 026 ===
Next is Reference Lines. For many graphs, you can add reference lines by clicking New reference line in the Reference Lines group. After a reference line is added, you can specify a label, a value, and the axis where the reference line will be drawn.
Alternatively, you can specify the value of the reference line by dragging the reference line in the object. Reference lines are useful for comparing data values to a benchmark or target.

=== Lesson Overview 029 ===
In this lesson, you will look at the most fundamental objects. First, you will look at tables. You can use them to view exact values when making comparisons and include list tables and crosstabs. Next, you will explore different types of bar charts. They are useful for making comparisons and include bar charts, targeted bar charts, dot plots, needle plots, and butterfly charts. Lastly, you will look at time plots, which are useful to show data over time.

=== Line Charts 121 ===
Line charts are useful for showing trends in measures over time. Line charts can also be used to identify patterns among or between any ordinal values (like age groups or loyalty levels). Using line charts, you can see the trends for a single measure (univariate analysis) or identify the relationships between multiple measures (multivariate analysis). For line charts, the vertical axis is typically scaled to a zoomed-in view of the data. It is a best practice, however, to use a zero baseline when possible. This is typically assumed and can lead to misinterpretation of the chart or skew the understanding of the chart. You can use the Options pane to set a fixed minimum for the Y axis.
Line charts require a category and a measure. Additionally, line charts can contain groups, use lattice columns and rows, specify data tip values, display animation, and support the hidden data role. Options are available for specifying the baseline, changing the transparency of the line, specifying the grouping style (Overlay unfilled, Overlay filled, or Stack filled), setting the layout for multiple measures (Automatic, Shared axis, Separate axes), specifying the line thickness, adding markers, abbreviating numeric values, and adding and modifying data labels.

=== List Tables 459 ===
List tables are useful for viewing summary or detail data. This is especially useful when you are viewing the data for the first time. You can use the list table to view the distinct values for each column and identify the range of values. Viewing data in a list table is an easy way to spot obvious data quality issues. However, be aware that, by default, values are aggregated to display one row for each distinct combination of category values.
List tables accept any columns from your data source (including categories, date, datetime, time, geography data items, measures, and aggregated measures) and support the hidden data role. Options are available for displaying detail data, using abbreviated numerical values for each measure column, combining excluded rows (like from ranks and post-aggregate filters) into "All Other", wrapping text in the cells, adding and modifying borders and headings, fitting columns to the width of the table based on the space available, and enabling sorting.
For cells, additional options are available for adding horizontal and vertical lines, including row numbers and an optional customized heading, condensing the row height to remove extra white space in rows, and modifying the background color and alternating background color of the cells.
When working with list tables, you might want to resize columns, rearrange columns, sort columns, hide columns, freeze columns, or add sparklines to the table. You can resize columns to improve the readability of the data by ensuring that data values are not cut off and by reducing the amount of white space. To resize columns, click on the edge of a column heading and drag to the left or right to resize.
You can rearrange columns to more easily view related data items. To rearrange columns, you can use the Roles pane and drag the column to a new position in the list of columns, or you can click and drag a column from the list table to the new position.
You can sort columns in a list table to display the values in a logical order. By default, the list table is sorted in ascending order by the first data item added to the object. You can modify the sort by right-clicking the column heading, selecting Sort, and selecting the data item and order of the sort. Alternatively, you can click another column heading in the table to change the sort. Clicking once sorts by that column in ascending order, and clicking twice sorts by the column in descending order.
You can also sort by multiple columns in the list table. To add an additional sort column, right-click the column heading, select Sort, and select the data item to add and the order of the sort. Alternatively, you can hold down the Ctrl key and click another column heading in the table to add a secondary sort. Clicking once sorts by that column in ascending order, and clicking twice sorts by the column in descending order.
The arrow displayed for the primary sort column is larger than the arrow displayed for the secondary and other sort columns. Notice that you can view all sorting columns by right-clicking the list table and selecting Sort, but the sort order is not indicated. You can click Remove sort level to remove the last sort. If you would like to sort by a hidden column, you first need to make the column visible, sort by the column, and then re-hide the column.
You can hide a column in a list table when you want to use the values (like for a display rule or for external links, or to map data sources), but you don't want the data to be shown in the list table. To hide a column in a list table, you can right-click the column and select Hide column or use the Roles pane to move the column to the Hidden data role. Be aware that hidden columns are included in the query results and might increase the number of rows for the query.
You can freeze columns in a list table to maintain labels for your data as you scroll through a wide table. To freeze columns in a list table, right-click anywhere in a column and select Freeze all columns to the left. This adds a dark gray line to the list table that indicates the freeze line. You can then drag and drop columns on either side of this line to change the frozen columns.
You can add a sparkline to present a single trend over time, like to show stock trends or production rates. A sparkline is a small line graph without axes or labels that fits in a single cell and repeats for each row in a column. Sparklines are intended to be succinct and noteworthy. To add a sparkline, right-click the list table and select Add Sparkline. Options are available for specifying a column label; selecting a date, datetime, or time data item for the time axis; selecting a measure to display as a trend; and setting a baseline for the sparkline and a value and fill type for the baseline (gradient or solid). The data tip for a sparkline shows the time range, the highest and lowest values in the sparkline, and the final value.

=== Needle Plots 039 ===
Needle plots are useful for comparing values against a benchmark and for spotting trends and outliers. It uses vertical line segments (needles) connected to a horizontal baseline. The baseline can be at zero, or it can be at some other value. Needle plots can be useful for comparing results for a drug trial to the placebo group. Values above the baseline signal improvement and values below the baseline signal decline.
Needle plots can use lattice columns and rows and support the hidden data role. Options are available for specifying the baseline, changing the transparency and the thickness of the lines, and adding markers.

=== Step 1 Identify the Object 100 ===
First, you need to identify the object you want to use in the report. The Objects pane, by default, sorts all objects into multiple groups: Tables, Graphs, Geo Maps, Controls, Analytics, Containers, and Content. Depending on your licenses, you might also see groups for Statistics and Machine Learning objects.
From the Objects pane, you can filter the list of objects. The filter will instantaneously return any matches to the strings entered. In addition, you can use the Objects menu button to expand or collapse all object groups, show and hide objects, sort objects, show or remove object groups, reorder object groups, and import custom graphs created with SAS Graph Builder. Filtering and sorting can make it easier to find a specific object or recently used objects. To speed up development time, consider hiding any objects you won't be using and reordering object groups to display the most frequently used groups first.

=== Step 2 Insert the Object on the Canvas 031 ===
When you have identified the object you would like to use, you can insert it on the canvas by dragging it, double-clicking the object, or right-clicking the object and adding it to the current page. Make use of the grid layout to easily arrange the objects on the canvas.
When an object is added to the canvas, a placeholder illustrates how the graph will look when data is assigned. Before adding data, the report designer can modify options to customize the graph and the placeholder will update to reflect those changes.

=== Step 3 Specify Roles 125 ===
Next, you assign roles to the object using the Data Roles pane. A data role specifies how a data item is used in a report object. Many objects have similar roles, but each report object has its own list of data roles; some roles are required, and others are optional. For example, a bar chart has two required roles (Category and Measure) and many optional roles (Group, Lattice columns, Lattice rows, Data tip values, Animation, and Hidden). A crosstab has only one required role (Measures) and two optional roles (Columns and Rows).
On the Data Roles pane, you can assign data to multiple roles using the Assign data button, to a specific role by clicking Add next to the role, or by dragging a data item from the Data pane to a role. For some roles, only specific types of data items can be added. For example, only Category data items can be added to the Category, Group, Lattice columns, Lattice rows, and Hidden roles for a bar chart. If the report contains multiple tables, you can use the drop-down list at the top of the Add Data Item window to select the table before assigning data items.
In the chart on the canvas, data can be assigned by clicking the Assign data button in the object or by dragging data items to the chart. Data is automatically assigned to roles when data items are dragged onto the object.

=== Step 4 Modify Options 118 ===
After specifying roles, you modify options to specify the object styling, frame styling, text styling, and data colors for the object. Options can be modified using the object's toolbar or using the Options pane.
The object's toolbar enables you to modify roles, delete, duplicate, and move the object, add links, export and share the object, create an object template, and change the chart type.
The Options pane enables you to modify general options and object-specific options. Many objects have similar options, but each report object has its own group of options. For example, a bar chart has options for modifying the bars (like direction, spacing, and grouping style). A crosstab has options for modifying the table (like heading formats and colors, measure placement, and column size).
All objects have general options (like Object, Style, and Layout). Most graph objects have axis options (like X Axis Options and Y Axis Options) and graph options (like Graph Frame, Reference Lines, Legend, and Data Options). Table objects have table options (like Cells, Cell Visualizations, Totals and Subtotals, or Totals).

=== Step 5 Explore Data 212 ===
Lastly, you can explore the data by changing the object type, maximizing the object to view details, and selecting data values in the object.
After you have placed the object on the canvas, you can change the object to a different type using the Object overflow menu or by right-clicking the object.
This can help you pick the best object for your data and your data story. SAS Visual Analytics attempts to keep the original object's display rules, filters, ranks and data item assignments. If it cannot keep those settings, a message will appear with details on which settings were not transferred. Be aware that you cannot change an object's type when the object is maximized.
You can maximize an object by clicking the Maximize button from the object's toolbar or by right-clicking the object and selecting Maximize view.
This enables you to see a Details table that shows the data used to create the object. You can click the heading in the Details table to sort the values.
Some objects, like analytic objects, have additional tabs that provide more information about the object, like results or a natural language summary of the analysis. When an object is maximized, you cannot make changes to the layout of the report, add objects to the canvas, or modify data items in the Data pane. You can, however, make changes to the object using the right pane (like change options, modify roles, or add actions). You can maximize an object in both Edit and View mode and use the Details table to examine the actual data values or select a portion of the graph.
Many graph objects enable you to select data values from the graph, which can be useful if you want to initiate actions, create selection filters, or create custom groups.
You can select data values by clicking the values in the object (and using the Ctrl key to multi-select) or by clicking and dragging to create a rectangular selection of values.
Multi-cell graphs select data using selection mirroring, which means that when you select data values in one plot, the selection is mirrored across all plots. To deselect data values, click outside of the selection or use the Ctrl key to deselect the values.

=== Table Options Cell Visualizations 103 ===
Let's look at Cell Visualizations.
For both list tables and crosstabs, you can create cell visualizations by clicking New cell visualization and selecting a measure. After a cell visualization is added, you can specify the type (Bar or Heat map), the color or gradient, and for bar cell visualizations, the placement of the cell visualization. The cell visualization fits in a single cell and is useful for quickly comparing values across rows.
Cell visualizations can be either a bar or a heat map. For the bar type, each bar is sized to its relative value within the column, and you can change the color of the bar. For the heat map, each cell is colored according to its relative value in the column, and you can change the gradient. In addition, for the bar, you can also specify the placement of the bar: the bar can be to the left of the text, to the right of the text, or replace the text. Be aware that cell visualizations can be added only after a measure is added to the table.

=== Table Options Cells 145 ===
Table objects have table options (like Cells, Cell Visualizations, Totals, or Totals and Subtotals).
For both list tables and crosstabs, you can specify the format of the cells. Options include Horizontal lines, Vertical lines, Row numbers, Condense row height, Background color, Alternating background color, and Format.
The Horizontal lines option, when selected, displays horizontal lines, and the Vertical lines option, when selected, displays vertical lines. By default, both are selected. Horizontal lines can help viewers compare values for a single row, especially when many data values are displayed. The Vertical lines option, on the other hand, can help separate values in each column, especially when there is a lot of text.
The Row numbers option displays row numbers. When selected, you can specify an automatic or custom heading for the column and, for crosstabs, you can choose to restart numbers for each category value in the first column.
The Condense row height option removes extra white space in all the rows so that more data is visible on the screen. This option is selected by default. White space, however, can be useful for improving the readability and increasing the impact of your report, so consider modifying this option.
The Background color option enables you to specify the color for the cells, and the Alternating background color option enables you to select a different color for every other row to improve the readability of the table. Because you should not overuse colors in your report, it's recommended to use neutral colors for these options.
The Format option enables you to modify the text of the cells, like the font, size, and color.

=== Table Options Totals 027 ===
The next table option is the Totals option.
For list tables, the Totals option enables you to add totals. You can specify which measures will display totals; show labels for totals; and choose the background color of the cells, the format of the values (like the font, the size, and the color of the text) and the placement of the totals. Totals are calculated using the aggregation specified for the measure.

=== Table Options Totals and Subtotals 043 ===
Finally, let's talk about Totals and Subtotals.
For crosstabs, the Totals option enables you to add totals to the crosstab and the Subtotals option enables you to add subtotals to the crosstab. You can specify the axis where totals and subtotals will be displayed (rows, columns, or both), which measures will display totals and subtotals, the background color of the cells, the format of the values (the font, the size, the color), and the placement of the totals (before the headings or after the headings). Totals and subtotals are aggregated using the aggregation specified for the measure. If the crosstab uses an indented layout, subtotals are always shown.

=== Tables 013 ===
SAS Visual Analytics has different types of tables that are useful for viewing exact values. Table objects are located in the Tables group in the Objects pane and include list tables and crosstabs.

=== Targeted Bar Charts 053 ===
Targeted bar charts are useful for comparing values against a benchmark or target. The targets can be the previous year's value, a company-defined target, or some other measure. Targeted bar charts are a variation of a bar chart that includes a bar representing the measure and a line representing a target value. As with bar charts, targeted bar charts should use a zero baseline. To make it easier to identify which values exceed the target and which fall below the target, add a display rule to the graph. In this example, the bars are colored blue when the target is exceeded and pink when the target has not been met.
Targeted bar charts can use lattice columns and rows, display animation, and support the hidden data role. Options are available for changing the direction, the spacing, and the transparency of the bars, adding and modifying data labels, and abbreviating numeric values.

=== Thresholds for Report Objects 218 ===
Each report object has a threshold for how much data it can visually display. Many report objects will not display high-cardinality data items with many unique values. For more information about the default client-side thresholds for report objects, see "High-Cardinality Thresholds for Objects" in the SAS Visual Analytics Reference documentation. These client-side thresholds are controlled by the maxRowsLookup properties for the sas.reportdata.properties service.
A client-side threshold is the amount of data that CAS will send in the response to the client--in this case, Visual Analytics.
When you create an object in Visual Analytics, the client will send a request to CAS. CAS, similar to a data warehouse, contains all the data. The analytic engines summarize the data based on the object, the roles assigned, and any filters or ranks applied. After summarization is complete, the analytic engines limit the number of aggregated rows based on the object's client-side threshold and sends the aggregated result back to the client.
Let's consider an example. Suppose you would like to display a list of all your customers in a table. You have 68,300 customers, but the default client-side threshold for list tables is 40,000 rows. This means that the list table will display only 40,000 rows. If a total is included, this row counts as one of the 40,000.
To see all customers, you can modify the Override system data limit option to 70,000. In this case, all customers will be displayed in the list table.
Notice that even when the list table truncates the rows due to the client-side threshold, the totals are still accurate and based on all the data.
An administrator can edit the configuration properties for an existing object or create a new configuration if one is not listed for the object by default. Modifying these configuration properties will impact all instances of the object in the environment and can directly impact performance. Before making changes, ensure that the changes are necessary and that they will not adversely impact your environment. For more information about the configuration properties, see "Configuration Properties for SAS Visual Analytics" in the SAS Visual Analytics: Reference documentation.

=== Time Plots 014 ===
Time plots are useful for viewing trends over time. Time plots are located in the Graphs group in the Objects pane and include comparative time series plots, line charts, and time series plots.

=== Time Series Plots 055 ===
Time series plots can be used to show trends in measures over time by displaying data using a line that connects data values. Time series plots are excellent for identifying seasonal peaks or troughs in your data.
Time series plots require a date or datetime data item for the Time axis and one measure. Additionally, time series plots can contain groups, display data tip values, and support the hidden data role. Options are available for specifying the binning interval (Automatic, Fixed count, or Use format), the transparency of the line, the grouping style (Overlay unfilled, Overlay filled, or Stack filled), the layout for multiple measures (Automatic, Shared axis, Separate axes), and the line thickness. Additional options are available for adding markers, abbreviating numeric values and adding and modifying data labels.

=== Working with List Tables and Crosstabs 154 ===
For both list tables and crosstabs, you can create cell visualizations to quickly compare values across rows. Cell visualizations can be either a bar or a heat map. The bar type is useful for making comparisons between rows, whereas the heat map is useful for grouping similar values together. For the bar type, options are available for changing the color of the bar and the placement of the bar (Left of text, Right of text, and Replace text). For the heat map type, options are available for changing the gradient. Be aware that cell visualizations can be added only after a measure is assigned to the table.
For both list tables and crosstabs, you can add totals to compare individual values to overall values. Totals are calculated using the aggregation specified for the measure. Options are available for selecting which measures will display totals, setting the background color of the cells, formatting the value (like the font, the size, and the color of the text), and specifying the placement of the totals. For list tables, you can also show labels for totals, and for crosstabs, you can specify where totals will be displayed (rows, columns, or both).
In addition, for crosstabs, you can add subtotals to compare individual values to grouped values. Subtotals are also calculated using the aggregation specified for the measure. Options are available for specifying where totals will be displayed (rows, columns, or both), selecting which measures will display subtotals, setting the background color of the cells, formatting the value (like the font, the size, and the color of the text), and specifying the placement of the subtotals.
When both list tables and crosstabs are exported to Excel, the structure of the table is preserved. This includes all the formatting, cell visualizations, all display rules, and totals.

=== Working with Objects 018 ===
Objects can be used to tell your data story. When working with objects, follow five simple steps: (1) identify the object, (2) insert on canvas, (3) specify roles, (4) modify options, and (5) explore data.

=== Calculated Data Items vs Aggregated Measure 748 ===
Recall the available types of calculated items we can create in Visual Analytics. Creating hierarchies and custom categories were covered in the Refining Data for Effective Reports lesson. Geographic topics will be covered in the Working with Impactful Objects lesson and Parameters will be covered in the SAS Visual Analytics 2 course.
This lesson will cover calculated data items like date time, category, and measures and aggregated measures.
In general, the term "calculated data item" means that it is a new data item created from existing data by using an expression.
For a calculated data item, the expression is evaluated for each row of unaggregated data. That means the expression will be evaluated for each observation in the source data before aggregations are performed. A calculated data item uses default aggregation behavior and the expression accepts parameters.
For an aggregated measure, the expression is evaluated on aggregated data. Aggregations are evaluated by context and that is determined by the object's Role assignments. There are two contexts that can be used when defining an aggregated measure expression: By Group -- which calculates the aggregation for each subset of the data item, or For All -- which calculates aggregation for the entire data item (after filtering). The aggregation behavior is defined by the expression, hence its name, aggregated measure. Some, leaning toward most, of the aggregated operators accept parameters.
Let's look at a calculated data item. Calculated data items are created by performing mathematical calculations on numeric values, such as Profit equals Revenue minus Expenses, or by performing operations on date/datetime data items or categories, such as Age equals Today minus the Date of Birth or a Full Name equals the First Name concatenated with the Last Name.
For example, you can create a new calculated data item (Target Profit) by multiplying Profit and Increase. For each row in the data source, the operation is evaluated, and the new data item is created. Then, when that data item is used in a graph (for example, with Product Line), the values for Target Profit are totaled for each Product Line.
Now let's look at the aggregated measure. The first step is to aggregate the values and then perform the operations. The aggregation context changes depending on the object's data role assignments. For example, the Percent of Total expression requires to first sum the data values by group, then sum all of the data values, and then take the ratio of those two sums.
Another example is for a periodic operation, which means over the span of a time group. In this example, Difference from Previous Period, the aggregated measure, will first find the data values of CurrentYear and take the Sum, then find the data values of PreviousYear and take the sum, and then take the difference of those two sums.
For each aggregation you use in your expression, you must define an aggregation context.
As a reminder from our Percent of Total example, notice that the numerator uses Sum (ByGroup) and the denominator uses Sum (ForAll).
For example, you can create a new aggregated measure (Profit (Percent of total)) by dividing the sum of the profit for each group by the sum of the profit for all groups. In this instance, because Profit (Percent of total) is paired with Product Line, Profit is first totaled for each product line, and then Profit is totaled for all.
Then, the operation is evaluated for each Product Line to show the contribution to total profit.
You could take the same aggregated measure and pair it with Region to see the contribution of each region to total profit. The dynamic nature of aggregated measures makes them extremely useful for analysis and reporting.
Now let's see how we build these expressions in Visual Analytics using the Expression Editor. To open the Expression Editor, use the New data item menu and select Calculated item. There is a single user interface to build either a calculated data item or aggregated measure. Then, you can use the buttons to build your expression, or freeform type. You can use the filter at the top to subset the list, and hovering over will provide a summary of the operator or function. When you make a selection, operators and functions will open in the Expression Editor Side Pane. This gives you additional drop-down menus to help build your expression, and additional details about the expected variables.
If you prefer freeform typing, you can use the built-in syntax help to build your expression. It will suggest functions and data items as you type. Use the arrow keys on your computer to navigate the offered suggestions, and the ENTER or TAB key to select a suggestion. Depending on your screen size a description of the function and sample syntax will display or you can click on the arrow to expand. If you freeform type the name of the data item with a space in its name, ensure you enclose it in a name literal. To do this, put the data item name within single quotes with an n after the closing quote. You can also see additional data item properties.
When you click on a function, you can use the side pane to easily navigate to nested subexpressions inside of the selected function.
To point out some more enhanced coding features, you can create parameters on the fly. You can also add comments to your expression using standard SAS syntax. At the bottom, click to display error messages to help debug the expression.
You can right-click inside the editor to format your code to make it more readable or to use the command palette. The command palette allows you to find and replace, highlight all occurrences of an expression, change the code font size, and much more!
Also notice that when you are building a calculated data item expression, you will see a Results Preview window. This is not available for aggregated measure expressions as the expression cannot be evaluated until assigned to an object.
I mentioned earlier that we have a single user interface to define both calculated data items and aggregated measures. Here we can see their definitions side by side. Can you spot any differences? Notice that the Calculated Data Item expression has no aggregation functions, the result type is determined by the expression, we have a results preview, and there is no scoped expression definition.
For the Aggregated Measure expression, it must contain an aggregation function and context type. Its result type is always an aggregated measure, there are no results to preview, and you can see that there is a scope definition option. A scoped aggregated measure is when you can define multiple expressions for a single aggregated measure that changes depending on the intersection of data roles. A scoped aggregated measure is covered in more detail in the Visual Analytics 2 course.
Here's a look at the available operators and functions available to you in the Expression Editor. When creating complex aggregated measures, you might run into an error that tells you that you cannot have nested aggregations. This means that you might need to perform your calculation in a multi-step process. This is covered in greater detail in the Visual Analytics 2 course in which you make use of an aggregated data source and aggregated measures.
Periodic operators are a special set of operators that aggregate data over a period of time. Typically, the interval data item requires the format to include the year. For example, if you were looking at weeks, every year has zero to 52 weeks in a year, and the only way to differentiate them is to include year. That is how this example is able to calculate Profit (Difference from previous period). Notice that the first row is missing. That is because the previous period's data is not available and it cannot be calculated.

=== Category Calculated Data Item 045 ===
Now that we've covered calculated data items and aggregated measures for numeric results, let's look at some examples of a category calculated data item. A category calculation will return an alphanumeric result that is evaluated for every row in the data. The category result is used by report objects similar to a by group variable. It cannot be aggregated. Here is a calculated date/datetime example. Age is equal to today's date minus the date of birth divided by 365.25. Because this is a calculated data item, we have a results preview. And in this next example, we will look at a calculated category. In this case, we are pulling the first three characters of the Order ID.

=== Lesson Overview 014 ===
In this lesson, you will learn how to create new calculated data items which can be calculated datetimes, categories, or measures, aggregated measures, and quick calculations that are necessary for analysis.

=== Quick Calculations 232 ===
If building aggregated measures from scratch seems intimidating, do not worry. SAS Visual Analytics comes with many out-of-the-box quick calculations. These are one-click calculations. When you right-click any data item in the Data pane, you'll have the option to create a new calculation. All you need to do is enter a name and select the type of calculation. There are quick calculations available for category data items, date/datetime data items, and measure data items.
Let's look at a Category Quick Calculation. Start by right-clicking a category data item and selecting New calculation. An autogenerated name will be entered, but you can edit it if you like. Then select the type of calculation you want generated. The aggregated measure is created for you and added to the Data pane. You can right-click the aggregated measure to view the generated expression.
Let's look at a Date/Datetime Quick Calculation. The Min and Max aggregated measures will return a date/datetime formatted aggregated measure. This means that the result type is an aggregated measure and not a date/datetime category data item. You can use the Min/Max of a date/datetime like other aggregated measures but it cannot be used directly in Filters or Boolean expressions yet.
Let's look at a Measure Quick Calculation. The Periodic calculations are available only when the data source has date/datetime data items available. If you select a Periodic Quick Calculation, then you will also be prompted to select the date interval for which to build the expression. The only date/datetime data items listed will be the ones you see in the Data pane for your data source. Only the date/datetime data items including a year format available in the data source will be listed.
If you want additional granularity, remember that you can duplicate your date/datetime data item and select a different format, or you can create a date/datetime hierarchy, which will automatically generate several levels of date/datetime data items that you can use.
Remember that the automatic date hierarchy will hide those data items by default, so you will need to unhide them to use.
To edit quick calculations, right-click the aggregated measure and select Edit. You can also duplicate the expression, which can be a useful starting point if you need to create a complex aggregation measure and want to use one of the Quick Calculations as a starting point. Remember that you can click inside the subexpression to view it in the side pane, get assistance in making edits, or understand the syntax and variables.

=== Content Objects 016 ===
Content objects are useful for conveying information when a graph is not required. Content objects are located in the Content group in the Objects pane and include text, images, web content, job content, and data-driven content.

=== Creating Custom Maps 242 ===
If the predefined geo maps do not meet your requirements, you can create your own geo map using the SAS Graph Builder. To create a custom geo map, you need to follow these steps: (1) Choose graph elements, (2) layout elements, (3) configure roles, (4) adjust appearance, and (5) save and use.
For a custom geo map, you need to use a Geo Map layer (which provides the base map on which your data is displayed) and one or more of the following graph elements: Contour Plot (geo only) to create a contour geo map, Region Plot (geo only) to create a region geo map, Bubble Plot to create a bubble geo map, or Scatter Plot to create a coordinate geo map.
You can also mix and match these elements to create your custom geo map. For example, you can create a geo map with two scatter plots overlaid on top, one to represent store locations and one to represent customer locations.
Once you have chosen the graph elements, the next step is to layout the elements. For a custom geo map, the Geo Map layer must be added first, so it's the bottom layer of the map. Then, you can add other graph elements on top of the base map (which will represent your geographical data). When you layout the elements, sample data is used in the graph template so you can see what the graph will look like when used in a report.
Next, you can configure roles for your graph elements. Each graph element comes with required roles and has optional roles you can include. For example, scatter plots have a required Geographic ID and optional roles (Data Tip, Color, and Data Label). For custom geo maps, data-driven lattice roles are not available because a geo map does not support multi-cell layouts. In this example, we have renamed each required role to provide more information to the report designer. Geography (General) will be used to show store locations and Geography (Specific) will be used to show customer locations.
Then, you can adjust the appearance of the geo map by customizing options. Options are available for the graph template, each level of the graph, and for legends. In this example, we have modified the scatter plot 1 marker to show store locations as a large blue circle and we have modified the scatter plot 2 marker to show customer locations as a small black circle.
Lastly, you can save the geo map and import it into Visual Analytics for use in your reports. Custom maps can be imported from the Objects pane and once imported, can be used like any other object. You can assign data, modify options, and add filters, ranks, actions and display rules.

=== Data-Driven Content Object 206 ===
The Data-driven content object enables you to utilize custom third-party visualizations in your report. These third-party visualizations can be developed in any JavaScript charting framework, like D3.js (spiral plot), Google charts (organizational chart), or CanvasJS (pyramid chart). In fact, the data-driven content object can be used to present any content that can be displayed in an iFrame (like illustrations or even photos).
The data-driven content object receives its data from Visual Analytics and can interact with filters, ranks, and actions in the same manner as other objects in your report. The data-driven content object can even be the source of an action, meaning you can add actions from the data-driven content to other objects in the report.
Messages are passed from the data-driven content object to Visual Analytics (instructional and selection messages) and from Visual Analytics to the data-driven content object (data messages).
Instructional messages (like the type, number, and order of data items required for the visualization) are sent from the data-driven content object to Visual Analytics.
Data messages (like the data assigned to the object and metadata information) are sent from Visual Analytics to the data-driven content object in JSON format.
Selection messages (like details about selections in the visualization) are sent from the data-driven content to Visual Analytics. This information can be used when the data-driven content object is the source of an action.
To use the data-driven content object, you will need some knowledge of HTML, CSS, and JavaScript. Examples on how to use the data-driven content object, including helper utilities and samples, can be found in the SAS Software GitHub repository for third-party visualizations *****(https://github.com/sassoftware/sas-visualanalytics-thirdpartyvisualizations).
Styling options are available for selecting the background, the border, and the padding for the data-driven content object. All other styling needs to be handled in the third-party visualization code.

=== Default Geographic Features 337 ===
With default geographic features, maps are displayed using OpenStreetMap. You can zoom, pan and create shape-based selections, search the map for points of interest, create location pins, create a radius-based geographic area using Euclidean distance, draw direct routes between multiple points, and use icons when working with display rules. Each of these default geographic features are free and are included by default with Visual Analytics.
You can take advantage of interactive zoom and pan features to magnify and select areas of your map. You can zoom the map using the scroll wheel on the mouse, using the tools on the overflow menu, or by using the Zoom to rectangle tool. To pan, or scroll, the map, select the Pan tool and click and drag in the map. To create a rectangular, free-form, or circular selection, click the pan tool, then select the appropriate tool and click and drag in the map to create the selection. Be aware that the zoom state and selections are saved and will be available the next time you view the report.
You can search in a geo map to return businesses and locations in the current map view. The search feature does not search the values in your data, but searches a database of geographic locations. When searching, you can create location pins to mark a specific location on a map. Pins can be labeled and colored, are saved with the report, and are visible to other users.
When a pin has been created, you can create a radius-based geographic area to select all points that fall within the defined boundaries. By default, you can create a circular selection using Euclidean distance, or the distance between points as the bird flies. To add a radius-based geographic area, click Add geo area, specify the distance, and click Draw area. Additional options are available if Esri Premium Services are configured.
After the geographic area is created, you can filter the data to include or exclude the selection or show demographic statistics (if integration with an Esri ArcGIS Online Account is configured). By default, the radius of the circular selection is specified in miles, but Visual Analytics settings enable you to change the default distance unit to kilometers if desired. A direct route can be added between multiple points using Euclidean distance. Routes can be labeled and colored, are saved with the report, and are visible to other users. Additional options are available if Esri Premium Services are configured.
For geo coordinate and geo network maps, you can define display rules to include a custom icon or image on the map. This is useful for distinguishing between the various markers. In this example, red sad face icons show customers with low customer satisfaction scores and green happy face icons show customers with high customer satisfaction scores. You can also show customer locations (using a person icon) and facility locations (using a building icon). When working with icons, make sure the markers have sufficient contrast to the background map so users can easily locate the icons.
To display icons on a geo map, create a display rule, specify the condition, and choose a style. Select a color, then, at the top of the window, click Icon. You can select from the list of Basic icons or upload a custom icon. Basic icons are impacted by the color selection, but custom icons are not. If you want a custom icon to use a specific color, you need to apply the color before you upload the image.

=== Esri ArcGIS Online Services 048 ===
With Esri ArcGIS Online Services, you can select an Esri map background for geo maps. Several map backgrounds are available, including National Geographic maps, topographic maps, world imagery maps, oceanic maps, and world transportation maps.
You can change the map background to an Esri map, in the Map group on the options pane, by clicking Browse next to Map service, then a map under services.arcgisonline.com. If you haven't accepted the Esri terms, you will be prompted to do so before you continue. Once Esri terms are selected, you can choose any available map without incurring additional charges.
You can also accept Esri ArcGIS Online Services terms and conditions in Visual Analytics settings.

=== Esri Premium Services 240 ===
With Esri Premium Services, you can create more advanced radius-based geographic areas, display demographic data for a selected area, and draw more advanced routes. These features incur a charge. To activate Esri Premium Services, you must provide a valid user ID and password from Esri. These credentials are used to collect credits from the account.
After a pin has been created, you can create more advanced radius-based geographic areas using driving, trucking, or walking distance or time. Driving distance and driving time creates an irregular area using roads, as if you were driving. Trucking distance and trucking time creates an irregular area using roads that allow trucks and using posted speed limits for trucks. Walking distance and walking time creates an irregular area using trails and sidewalks and an average walking speed. Additionally, you can include traffic to see the impact on travel time. Current traffic conditions can be used or typical traffic conditions at a specific time.
In this example, a 10-mile radius using driving distance was added from the center of Cary, North Carolina. Notice the irregular shape of the geographic area to account for access to roads. Alternatively, in this example, a 15-minute radius using trucking time was added from the center of Cary, North Carolina. The irregular shape of the geographic area accounts for roads that trucks can access and typical traffic on Monday at 5pm. Recall that adding these advanced radius-based geographic areas incurs an additional charge.
For a geographic area, demographic statistics, like population, age, income, households, housing, and marital status, can be added to the report for a specific geographic area. These can help you add additional context to the report.
After creating the geographic area, click Show demographics and choose demographic data to display. In this example, we can see the total number of households within the specified area. This information combined with driving distance or driving time can be used to analyze the specific areas to determine the market for a new store. Recall that adding demographic data to a geographic area incurs an additional charge.
Additionally, you can draw more advanced routes using driving, trucking or walking distance or time. Traffic can also be included in routes to calculate travel time. In this example, the geo map shows the route from Fort Worth Stockyards to the zoo using driving distance. Recall that adding advanced routes incur an additional charge.

=== Gauges 314 ===
Gauges, or dashboard indicators, are useful for measuring progress toward a goal, monitoring key performance indicators, comparing performance across groups, and tracking performance over time.
Due to their simplicity in reading and understanding, gauges are great for representing data that needs immediate attention or action. A bullet gauge is useful for comparing forecasts to actual values and often begins at zero. A speedometer gauge imitates the design of a speedometer on a vehicle and is useful for showing ratings (like for surveys) and are often normalized to 100%. This ensures that the ranges are consistent across multiple gauges and makes for easier comparison. Be aware that speedometers take up a lot of space and it can be hard for users to compare multiple gauges.
A thermometer gauge is useful for showing progress toward a goal for fundraising. A progress indicator can easily display the utilization of a resource (like the occupancy of a hotel or inventory levels).
In Visual Analytics, many shapes and styles of gauges are available. Here you can see all variations of arc and dial shapes and all the styles of gauges you can create. To create a traditional speedometer gauge, use the dial shape and the speedometer style.
Here you can see all variations of linear shapes and all the styles of gauges you can create. To create a traditional bullet gauge, use the horizontal linear shape and the bullet style. To create a traditional thermometer gauge, use the vertical linear shape and the thermometer style. To create a traditional progress indicator gauge, use the vertical linear shape and the progress indicator style.
In addition to assigning data to roles for the gauge, you must also define a display rule. A display rule is added automatically to the gauge. By default, the display rule contains three intervals and a default range (from about 40% to 160% of the aggregated measure value). If the measure is a percentage (like customer satisfaction or product quality), the starting range begins at 0%. It's a best practice to define intervals based on your business objectives and adjust goals as circumstances change.
Gauges can display targets, can contain groups, and support the hidden data role. Options are available for changing the shape (Arc, Dial, Half dial, Full dial, Horizontal linear, or Vertical linear), the style (Bullet, Speedometer, Thermometer, Progress indicator, Active range only, or Custom), and for specifying what type and how data labels are displayed. For labels, you can choose to show the value label (for the measure), the range labels (for the display rule), or the target label (for the target).
For custom gauges, additional options are available for choosing the type of indicator (Needle, Bar, or Bar needle), for specifying the ratio of the range on the gauge, for displaying the active color only, and for specifying the placement of the range (inside or outside).
For groups, additional options are available for specifying the lattice cell limit, the row limit, the column limit, and the lattice layout.

=== Geo Map Examples 209 ===
Recall that geo maps are a great way to show how location is important to your analysis. You can use geo maps to show distribution, density, cluster, proximity, and performance.
For distribution, the geo map shows the distribution of commuting workers in Europe. The areas with larger bubbles typically spend more time commuting than those with smaller bubbles. The bubbles are also colored to show the amount of congestion in each area (where green is low and red is high). Notice how larger bubbles often appear red (meaning there is high congestion and more time spent commuting) and smaller bubbles often appear green (meaning there is low congestion and less time spent commuting).
For density, the geo map shows the density of airport locations worldwide. Because we are not interested in each point individually, this type of map helps us draw conclusions by looking at the locations where most bubbles are grouped. For example, if you look at locations in Asia and Australia, you can see that many airports tend to be closer to the coasts. Perhaps this is where much of the population lives in these continents.
Both of these geo maps display individual markers for workers and airports, respectively. We can cluster adjacent markers together to better locate the areas with a high concentration of markers. For example, the cluster geo map shows the clusters of customers in Mexico. We can easily see that the southern tip of Mexico seems to have more customers than the rest of the country.
In addition, we can use geo maps to show proximity. In the proximity example, the geo map shows all the customers located within five miles of the Louvre in Paris. This can be useful for identifying which customers are within a short drive of my current location.
Lastly, this performance geo map shows performance for basketball. Specifically, it's looking at shots made during a game. Each bubble represents a shot made, and the color of the bubble represents the distance from the basket. This example is a special object made to look like a map. It uses a scatter plot overlaid on an image to show a map-like view of a basketball court.

=== Geo Map Options 151 ===
While each geo map has specific options, some options are common across all geo map types. These options include Enable zoom and pan, Enable data label thinning, Change type, Map background, Map service, and Transparency.
The Enable zoom and pan option enables you to display or hide the zoom and pan controls for the geo map. If this option is disabled, the map cannot be zoomed or panned from its current setting. Be aware that resizing the browser can have unintended consequences. If this feature is disabled be sure to test on multiple devices to ensure the map appears as intended.
The Enable data label thinning option hides data labels if needed to avoid too much overlapping text.
The Change type option enables you to change the map type for a specific layer in the object. For example, clicking Change type by the Region group in a geo region-coordinate map will enable you to replace that layer with a different map type (a Line layer).
The Map background option enables you to display or hide the map background. You might want to hide the map background if you are displaying a region map, to limit the amount of chart junk.
The Map service option enables you to specify the source for the background map. If Esri ArcGIS Online Services are accepted, additional map backgrounds might be available.
The Transparency option enables you to set the transparency of the map background. You might want to adjust this to ensure there is sufficient contrast between the data and the map background.
Additionally, for geo maps that use multiple layers (like geo line-coordinate, geo region-coordinate, or custom geo maps created with SAS Graph Builder), you can hide or display specific layers as desired. This may help improve the readability of the map, especially when a lot of data points are displayed.

=== Geo Maps 039 ===
Geo maps are useful when location is an important part of the analysis. The map objects can show location using points, polylines, or polygons. Maps that use points are useful for pinpointing exact locations and include geo bubble maps, geo coordinate maps, and geo pie maps. Maps that use polylines are useful for displaying paths or routes and include geo line maps, geo line-coordinate maps, and geo network maps. Maps that use polygons are useful for comparing regions and include geo cluster maps, geo contour maps, geo region maps, and geo region-coordinate maps.

=== Geography Data Items 205 ===
When you create geo maps, a geography data item is required. A geography data item is a category whose values are mapped to geographic locations or regions. Geography data items can be created using geographic name or code lookup, latitude and longitude in data, or a geographic data provider.
Geographic name or code lookup includes predefined geographic roles for countries, subdivisions, US states, and US zip codes. For countries, your data can be stored as country or region names (France, United States), ISO 2-letter codes (FR, US), ISO 3-letter codes (FRA, USA), ISO numeric codes (250, 840), or SAS Map ID values (FR, US). For subdivisions, your data can be stored as subdivision (State, Province), names (Borno, Delta), or SAS Map ID values (NG-08, NG-10). For US states, your data can be stored as state names (Texas, Colorado) or abbreviations (TX, CO). For US zip codes, your data must be stored as a five-digit zip code. If your data does not match these lookup values, you can cleanse the data or use another geography data source.
When you have data that does not fit one of the predefined geographic roles, you can use latitude and longitude coordinates that are stored in the current CAS table. When using coordinates, you want to ensure that your coordinate space matches the projection of your data. If it doesn't you might wind up with values that are placed incorrectly on the map.
Alternatively, you can use a geographic data provider that contains geographic information that is separate from the CAS table. This will enable you to display custom regions and routes in your report. The geographic data provider can be created from either an Esri feature service or a CAS table. Be aware that special user permissions are required to define and edit geographic data providers.

=== Image Object 240 ===
The Image object can be used to include graphics in your report, like the corporate logo, diagrams, or a background image.
To set an image as the background of the report, follow these steps: (1) add the precision container to the canvas. (2) Add an image object to the precision container. (3) Adjust the size and scale type of the image object, as necessary. Make sure the image starts in the top left corner and fills 100% of the height and 100% of the width of the container. (4) Add objects on top of the image and adjust the layout to arrange them as desired. Recall that for precision objects, you can control the placement, alignment, depth and size of all objects in the container. (5) Adjust styles of the objects (like the background color, the graph frame, and transparency) so they are easily visible in the report.
You can insert images from the web via URL, from SAS Content, or from your local machine. By default, Enable selection in the viewers option is not selected for images, so users who view the report will be unable to select the image. Options are available for specifying the tooltip text and selecting how the image is scaled to the object area in the report (None, Fit width, Fit height, Fit all, Stretch, and Tile).
If None is selected as the scale type, the actual size of the image is maintained. This means that the image might not fill the entire object if the image is smaller than the object, or scrollbars will be displayed if the image is larger than the object. If Fit width is selected, the width of the image is set to the width of the object and the height maintains the original aspect ratio of the image. Scrollbars will be displayed if the height of the image is larger than the height of the object. If Fit height is selected, the height of the image is set to the height of the object and the width maintains the original aspect ratio of the image. Scrollbars are displayed if the width of the image is greater than the width of the object.
If Fit all is selected, the image is modified to fit best in the object while maintaining the original aspect ratio. This may be the same as Fit width or Fit height depending on the aspect ratio of the image. If Stretch is selected, the height of the image is set to the height of the object and width of the image is set to the width of the object. The aspect ratio is not maintained. This option can result in a distortion of the image. If Tile is selected, the image is tiled in the object if the image is smaller than the object area. The image is displayed at its original size with no scrollbars.

=== Job Content Object 152 ===
The Job content object enables you to access the functionality of SAS code and display the output in your report. In addition to displaying output, SAS Viya jobs can access any data source (including SAS datasets, CAS tables, and external files), create output (like tables, files and other types of data) and even update tables.
SAS Viya jobs are created and managed in SAS Studio and consist of SAS code and a definition, which includes the name of the job, the author and the creation date and time. SAS Viya jobs can be created with no embedded form or can include a form.
Forms provide a user interface to the job, where the user can select options and submit the information. The details are then passed to the SAS code via macro variables. After the code is submitted, the results are returned to the browser.
You can create an HTML form using HTML code, create a step prompt using JSON code, or create a task prompt using XML and the common task model (CTM). Jobs with or without forms can be added to a Visual Analytics report using the Job content object, even legacy jobs created with task prompts. If the job was created using a task prompt, however, you will need to convert the job before you can add it to your report.
If a job contains parameters, you will be prompted to select values for the parameters when you add the job to the report. You can modify the parameters for the job, by clicking the object's toolbar and selecting Set job parameters. Notice from the object toolbar, you can also view the job log, which is useful for debugging.
Styling options are available for selecting the background, the border, and the padding for the job content object. All other styling needs to be handled in the SAS code.

=== Key Values 205 ===
The key value object is useful for highlighting a single value. It can be used to display a single aggregated measure or a summary of values for multiple groups. In this example, the key value that displays a single measure (total quantity ordered) is using the infographic style (which displays the value within a colored circle). The key value that displays a summary of values (average days to delivery) for multiple groups (order type) is using the text style (which displays values only) and is using the Lattice Category role.
Key values can display a lattice category and support the hidden data role. Options are available for changing the style (Text or Infographic), the highlight value (Measure value or Lattice category value), and modifying the position of the value.
For the Text style, additional options are available for modifying the alignment of the value and specifying what type and how data labels are displayed for the Text style. For labels, you can choose to show the measure label, the measure value, the lattice category label, the lattice category value, and the aggregation.
For the Infographic style, additional options are available for specifying what type and how additional information is displayed (Measure label, Lattice category value, Lattice category label, or None), and the color of the circle.
For lattices, additional options are available for specifying the sorting of the values in the lattice (Highest ranked value, Lowest ranked value, Alphabetical, or Reverse alphabetical), a row and column limit, and the lattice layout.
The Lattice Category role will enable you to add key values for multiple groups that are all the same size. It's important to note that if you want to show different measures using the Lattice Category role, you might have to prepare the data so that all the measure labels are in one column and all the measure values are in another column.
If you would like to see only the top or bottom group, you can add a rank to the key value object. This will mimic the functionality in earlier versions of SAS Visual Analytics.

=== KPI Charts 016 ===
KPI, or key performance indicator, charts are useful for highlighting one important fact. KPI charts are located in the Graphs and Content groups in the Objects pane and include key values, gauges, and dynamic text.

=== Lesson Overview 117 ===
In this lesson, you will explore three new objects. When location is a critical component of your analysis, geo maps can be very helpful. Use KPI charts to highlight one important fact. They include Key Value objects, gauges, and dynamic text.
Lastly, you can use content objects to convey information when a graph is not required. You can display text, images, web content, run customized code based on user input using the Job Content object, and integrate custom visualizations into your reports using the Data-Driven Content object.
To create geo maps in Visual Analytics, you must follow several steps: First, you need to create a geography data item. A geography data item is a category whose values are mapped to geographic locations or regions. Next, you need to choose the appropriate geo map to display your data. A geo map overlays data on a geographic map. Finally, you can explore the geo map by zooming, adding custom icons and images, adding pins, creating routes, and adding a distance-based selection. If you have Esri Premium services, you can also enhance your geo maps by adding travel distance and travel time selections and including demographic information.

=== Point Maps 333 ===
Maps that use points are useful for pinpointing exact locations. Point maps are located in the Geo Maps group in the Objects pane and include geo bubble maps, geo coordinate maps, and geo pie maps.
Geo bubble maps display your data as a bubble plot, where each bubble is located at the center of a geographic region or at the coordinate of a location. Geo bubble maps are useful when data is not evenly distributed. This is because the bubble plot can compare two measures. One is used for the size of the bubble, and one is used for the color of the bubble. Another advantage of a bubble plot is that the bubble size helps with comparing regions without the area of the region itself causing distortions. Sometimes, however, bubbles can overlap with other bubbles, making the chart difficult to read.
Geo bubble maps require a geography data item and a measure to specify the size of the bubble. In addition, geo bubble maps can use an additional measure to color the bubble, display data tip values, display labels for each bubble, display animation, and support the hidden data role.
Options are available for thinning data labels, changing the transparency of the bubbles, specifying the range for bubble sizes, and adding and modifying data labels.
Geo coordinate maps (also known as dot distribution maps or dot density maps) display a map with a scatter plot of coordinates where each marker is located at the center of a geographic region or at the coordinate of a location. Geo coordinate maps are useful for detecting spatial patterns and understanding the distribution of data over a geographic region. Geo coordinate maps should be used only when there is an even distribution of values within each region.
Geo coordinate maps require a geography data item and can use two additional measures: one to size the coordinate and one to color the coordinate. In addition, geo coordinate maps can display data tip values, display labels for each coordinate, display animation, and support the hidden data role.
Options are available for thinning data labels, changing the transparency of the coordinates, modifying the markers (size, shape, and fill), and adding and modifying data labels.
Geo pie maps display a map with pie charts located at the center of a geographic region or at the coordinate of a location. Geo pie maps are useful if you want to see the distribution of values among a few groups for a specific geographic area. Geo pie charts have the same issues as regular pie charts, but on a larger scale. Recall that for pie charts, it is very hard to compare the relative sizes of the slices in the chart and changes over time are difficult to detect. For these reasons, you should use geo pie charts sparingly.
Geo pie charts require a geography data item, a measure to size the slices, and a category to create the slices. In addition, geo pie charts can use an additional measure to size the pie chart, display data tip values, display labels for each pie chart, display animation, and support the hidden data role.
Options are available for thinning data labels, changing the chart style (pie or donut), changing the transparency of the pie charts, sizing the chart, specifying the starting point for each pie chart and the direction in which the slices are drawn, displaying the "Other" slice and the minimum percentage for values to be grouped into "Other" and adding and modifying data labels.

=== Polygon Maps 449 ===
Maps that use polygons are useful for comparing regions. Polygon maps are located in the Geo Maps group in the Objects pane and include geo cluster maps, geo contour maps, geo region maps, and geo region-coordinate maps.
Geo cluster maps display your data as a clustered scatter plot, where markers that are in close proximity to each other are clustered into a single marker. A number on the marker indicates the number of points represented by that cluster. Geo cluster maps are useful when you want to group locations in nearby areas for different zoom levels. As you zoom or pan in the geo map, the clustering is reevaluated. Because the data is grouped, clusters are not affected by display rules.
Geo cluster maps require a geography data item and can use two additional measures: one to size the bubble and one to color the bubble. In addition, geo cluster maps can display data tip values, display labels for each cluster, and support the hidden data role.
Options are available for thinning data labels, coloring clusters by value, specifying the maximum number of clusters, modifying the cluster spacing, changing the transparency of the clusters, formatting the markers (the size, the shape, and the fill), and adding and modifying data labels.
Geo contour maps display shaded areas that represent a three-dimensional shape on a two-dimensional map. Geo contour maps are best used to show very dense data (like population or elevation). Areas that display the same amount of data are shown on the same contour level, while the spacing between contour lines indicates differences between the locations (where closer lines indicate larger differences and widely spaced lines indicate smaller differences).
Geo contour maps require a geography data item and a measure to color the area.
Options are available for changing the transparency of the contour levels, specifying the base contour (those areas where information is not known), modifying the fill of the contour levels, specifying the number of levels, displaying or hiding contour lines, changing the bin count used to create the contour levels, and adding and modifying data labels.
Geo region maps (also known as choropleth maps) use colors to show variations by location. With region maps, larger regions seem more emphasized than smaller ones, which can skew your analysis. Geo region maps should be used only when there is an even distribution of values within each region. Be aware that a geo region map cannot be used to display zip code information (unless you define a geographic data provider with the boundaries for each zip code) or any geographic data that was created using latitude and longitude in data.
Geo region maps require a geography data item and a measure to color the area. In addition, geo region maps can display data tip values, display labels for each region, include data values for each region, display animation, and support the hidden data role.
Options are available for changing the transparency of the regions abbreviating numeric values, adding and modifying data labels and adding data values and displaying placeholders for regions not in the data.
Geo region-coordinate maps enable you to display both colored regions and coordinates. This type of map is great for comparing two levels of data. The region colors represent more general information (like states), and the coordinates represent more specific information (like customer locations).
Geo region-coordinate maps require two geography data items: one to display the regions and one to display the coordinates. For the region, a measure is required to color the region and additional data items can be used to display data tip values, to display labels for each region, to display data values for each region, and the region supports the hidden data role. For the coordinates, additional data items can be used to specify the size and color of the coordinates, to display data tip values, to display labels for each coordinate, and the coordinate supports the hidden data role. In addition, a date or datetime data item can be added to animate the map.
An option is available for thinning data labels. Additional options are available for both the regions and the coordinates. For the regions, you can change the transparency of the region, abbreviate numeric values, add and modify data labels and data values, and display placeholder regions for which there is no data. For the coordinates, you can change the transparency of the coordinate, modify the markers (the size, shape, and fill), abbreviate numeric values, and add and modify data labels.

=== Polyline Maps 339 ===
Maps that use polylines are useful for displaying paths or routes. Polyline maps are located in the Geo Maps group in the Objects pane and include geo line maps, geo line-coordinate maps, and geo network maps.
Geo line maps enable you to display line segments on a map. Geo line maps are useful for displaying linear geographical features, such as roads, railroads, pipelines, bus routes and delivery routes.
Geo line maps require a geography data item that was defined using a geographic data provider with defined polylines. In addition, geo line maps can use a measure to specify the width of the lines, use a category to color the lines and to specify a pattern for each line, display data tip values, display labels for each line, display animation, and support the hidden data role.
Options are available for changing the transparency of the lines, setting a fixed line thickness, and adding and modifying data labels.
Geo line-coordinate maps enable you to display line segments and a scatter plot of coordinates on a map. Geo line-coordinate maps are useful for displaying linear geographical features with important locations, such as roads with points of interest, bus routes with terminals, and delivery routes with stops.
Geo line-coordinate maps require two geography data items: one to display the lines, which must be defined using a geographic data provider with defined polylines, and one to display the coordinates. For the line, additional data items can be used to specify the width of the lines, to color the lines and specify a pattern for each line, to display data tip values, to display labels for each line, and the line supports the hidden data role. For the coordinates, additional data items can be used to specify the size and color of the coordinates, to display data tip values, to display labels for each coordinate, and the coordinate supports the hidden data role. In addition, a date or datetime data item can be added to animate the map.
An option is available for thinning data labels. Additional options are available for both the lines and the coordinates. For the lines, you can change the transparency of the lines, set a fixed line thickness, and add and modify data labels. For the coordinates, you can change the transparency of the coordinate, modify the markers (the size, shape, and fill), and add and modify data labels.
Geo network maps show a network diagram overlaid on a map. Geo network maps are useful for understanding how location affects the relationships in the network.
Geo network maps require two geography data items: one that represents the source and one that represents the target (which must be a subset of source values). A node is created for each value of the source and a link is created from each node to the node that corresponds to the target. For network maps to display as desired, the data must be structured in a specific way. The data structure required for network objects is discussed in more detail in the Visual Analytics 2 course. Additional data items can be added to specify the size and color of the nodes, to specify the width and color of the links, to display labels for each node, and to display data tip values.
Options are available for specifying the structure of the network and the type of the link (directed or undirected), adding and modifying data labels, adding link arrows and modifying the link curvature, and specifying the size of the nodes. Additional options are available when a source node is specified for the network diagram.

=== Text Object 111 ===
In addition to displaying static text (like instructions, annotations, or explanatory text), the Text object (in the Content group) can be used to display dynamic text, like the table modified time, a description of interactive filters, or the value of measure or parameter data items. Additionally, a text object can be used to create a report summary for the report. In this example, the report summary includes static text and the value of two measures (Number of Suppliers and Number of Products).
Dynamic text can be used to highlight a single number or add descriptive text for summary values. For example, you can use a control object with a parameter to filter the dynamic text and provide a summary of the selected value. To make it easier to work with dynamic text, add the dynamic text first, then fill in static text around the dynamic values.
The dynamic text object also supports display rules. In this example, when customer satisfaction is less than or equal to 50%, the text is highlighted in red, and when customer satisfaction is greater than 50%, the text is highlighted in green.

=== Text Object 148 ===
The Text object can be used to display static text, dynamic text, or both.
Static text can be useful for adding instructions, annotations, explanatory text, or to add a detailed description when no visual is possible (for example, if you want to display numbered lists or bullets). Static text can be a great way to give context to values or objects or state the conclusions that can be drawn from the data. When using text, avoid using sensory characteristics (like the size of the object, the shape of the item, or the position on the screen) as the sole means of conveying information or identifying a portion of the report.
Dynamic text can be used to display the table modified time, a description of interactive filters, or the value of measure or parameter data items (for example, if you want to highlight a single number or add descriptive text for summary values).
When used to display a value of a measure or a parameter, the text object supports display rules. In this example, when customer satisfaction is less than or equal to 50%, the text is highlighted in red and when customer satisfaction is greater than 50%, the text is highlighted in green.
A text object can also be used to display both static and dynamic text. For example, you can use a control object with a parameter to filter the dynamic text and provide a summary of the selected value. Additionally, a text object can be used to create a summary for the report. In this example, the report summary includes static text and the value of two measures (Number of Suppliers and Number of Products). To make it easier to work with both static and dynamic text, add the dynamic text first, then fill in static text around the dynamic values.

=== Web Content Object 038 ===
The Web content object is useful for adding references and video instructions to your report. It can be used to display a web page or embed a video in an inline frame (iFrame). Be aware that some websites are configured so that content cannot be displayed in an iFrame; this content cannot be displayed in the Web content object.
You can, however, embed YouTube videos; this would be useful for illustrating how to navigate the report or to explain the conclusions that can be drawn from the data. To embed a YouTube video, click Share, select Embed, and copy the URL specified for the src tag.

=== Working with Geo Maps 013 ===
When working with geo maps in a report, several levels of services are provided: default geographic features, Esri ArcGIS Online Services, and Esri Premium Services.

=== Actions 036 ===
Actions, like prompts, can make your reports more versatile by enabling viewers to access
    the information that's important to them.
    Actions are used to direct a report viewer's attention to specific results in a report.
    Two types of actions can be added to a page.
    Automatic actions that can be added between all objects at the page level and manual actions
    that can be added between specific objects on a page.
    Each page can either have manual actions or automatic actions, but not both.
    If the objects use different data sources, you need to specify a data source mapping
    for the actions to work.

=== Automatic Actions 101 ===
Automatic actions can be added between all objects on a single page.
    Three types of automatic actions are available,
    linked selection, one-way filter, and two-way filter.
    Using automatic actions enables viewers to tailor their experience
    by specifying the order in which their actions are applied,
    making the report more dynamic and valuable.
    In addition, automatic actions can speed up development time
    by enabling users to create reports quickly and easily.



    Automatic actions work only on objects that use the same data sourced
    or on objects that have sufficient data source mappings.
    Automatic actions are available only for objects
    that support linked selection or filter actions.
    In Visual Analytics, a setting, action mode for new pages,
    enables you to specify whether new pages use manual actions,
    default, or one of the automatic actions.
    As a best practice, you should finalize the report layout
    before enabling automatic actions.

=== Automatic Actions Linked Selection 116 ===
The automatic link selection action highlights related data in multiple objects.
    The data has the same appearance in each object, which makes it easy for report viewers to
    determine the relationship between the data.
    When automatic link selection actions are added to a page, all objects on the page have
    linked selection actions between them.
    In this example, the page contains four objects—a bubble plot, a tree map, a crosstab, and a
    bar chart.
    If the viewer selects a bubble in the bubble plot, the same data in the other objects is
    highlighted.



    Linked selection actions can be applied in any order, so if another viewer were to select
    a bar in the bar chart, the same data would be highlighted in the other objects.
    Notice that when another object is selected, the previous selection is removed and related
    data is highlighted in the other objects.



    When you drill down on a hierarchy and link selection automatic actions are enabled, the
    drill down propagates its selection to other objects on the page.
    However, the other objects are not displayed in an expanded state.
    Because screen readers cannot perceive elements that are highlighted with a linked selection
    action, for accessibility reasons, it's recommended that you avoid using these actions.

=== Automatic Actions One-Way Filters 110 ===
The automatic one-way filter action enables viewers to apply filters between objects in any order.
  The filters are applied in the order in which the data is selected on the page.
  This enables viewers to filter the data however they like without the designer having to account for every possible filtering scenario.
  
Typically, the automatic one-way filter action is used for objects that are hierarchical or cascading.
  In this example, the page contains four objects, a bubble plot, a tree map, a crosstab, and a bar chart.
  If the viewer selects a bubble in the bubble plot, the other objects on the page, the tree map, the crosstab, and the bar chart are filtered.
  Then, if the viewer selects a bar in the bar chart, the remaining objects on the page, the tree map, and the crosstab are filtered.
  Lastly, if the viewer selects a tile in the tree map, the last object on the page, the crosstab, is filtered. 

    When a selection in any chart is modified, all downstream filter selections are removed.
    By default, three-page templates, dashboard, panel, and stack have automatic one-way filter actions defined.

=== Automatic Actions Two-Way Filters 112 ===
The automatic two-way filter action enables viewers to apply filters between all objects on a page, even previously selected objects.
    This enables viewers to see the impact of filters on previously filtered objects as well.
    In this example, the page contains four objects, a button bar, a list control, a list table, and a bar chart.
    If the viewer selects a button on the button bar, the other objects on the page, the list control, the list table, and the bar chart are filtered.
    Then, if the viewer selects an item in the list control, all the objects on the page, including the previously selected object, the button bar, are filtered.
    Lastly, if the viewer selects a bar on the bar chart, all the objects on the page, including the previously selected objects, the button bar, and the list control, are filtered.



    For two-way automatic filters, deleting a filter token does not impact the other filters because there is no chain of filters.
    It's recommended that you not use required prompts with automatic two-way filters.
    If a prompt is required and two-way automatic filters are enabled, it's possible to get stuck in a single value selection for a prompt.

=== Common Filters 215 ===
Common filters are tied to a data source, are able to be shared between objects,
are available to the entire report, yes, across pages. And if edits are made to the common filter,
those changes are applied everywhere the filter is used.
Let's look at the steps to create and apply a common filter.
First, we must create a filter. That filter can be basic, advanced, or post-aggregate.
In this example, I have created a basic filter for the data item product line
and selected three values to be included, promo, store, and kiosk.
Step two is to edit the filter and give it a meaningful name.
To do that, use the toolbar and select advanced edit.
Next, give the filter an easy to understand name.
In this example, we use the name promo store kiosk only.
The third step is to change this to a common filter.
Use the toolbar and select change to common filter.
Once you do that, the common filter is now displayed in the data pane
for the associated data source at the bottom under the common filter grouping.
The fourth step is to apply the common filter to any desired objects that use the same data source.
Remember that the common filter is tied to this data source,
and for any object that has the same data source, you can apply the common filter.
And the object does not need to have those data items assigned to any data roles to be applied.
To apply the common filter, select the object and use the filters pane.
Then select the new filter menu and you see all the available common filters.
The filter icon is next to the name of the common filter.
Once you select the common filter, it is applied to the object.
You can repeat these steps for any of the objects in the report
on any page that uses the same data source.
Alternatively, like other data items in the data pane,
you could drag the common filter from the data pane onto the desired object.
And remember, if the common filter is edited,
those edits are immediately applied to all the objects using the common filter.
For a specific instance of a common filter,
you can revert the common filter to an object-specific copy.
You might do this if you want to make changes that affect only the current object
and not all the objects that use the filter.

=== Controls 243 ===
Both report and page crumbs can be created by using controls.
    A control is a report object that can be used to filter or narrow the scope of the data
    that is used in the report.
    Controls provide a way for report viewers to focus on a specific area of interest.
    When using controls, it's a best practice to add instructions as the title of the control
    object.
    This will give report viewers information about how the control is used in the report.
    To use controls effectively, you need to select the appropriate control for your data.
    One option is to use auto controls.
    Auto controls can be created by dragging data items to the report or page crumbed area.
    Visual Analytics chooses the appropriate control based on the type, category, date time, or
    measure and the cardinality of the data item.
    If you drag a hierarchy to the report or page crumbed area, the auto control chooses the
    best control object for each level of the hierarchy and automatic filters are added
    to create cascading controls.



    Alternatively, you can select your own control object.
    When selecting control objects, you need to consider the type and cardinality of the data
    item.
    For date and measure data items, a slider control should be used.
    This control enables a viewer to move a selector horizontally or vertically to select a single
    value or a range of values.
    In addition, you can specify options to automatically adjust the slider to a dynamic minimum or
    maximum.



    For category data items, the control that you use depends on whether you want the viewer
    to select multiple values or a single value.
    To select multiple values, a list control should be used.
    This control enables a viewer to select one or more category values from a list.
    In addition, you can specify options to search and to select or clear all values.
    The list control can only be used in the report and page crumbed areas inside a prompt container
    or when the report and page crumbed areas are on the left or right of the canvas.



    To select a single value, you also need to consider the cardinality.
    Remember that the cardinality measures the number of distinct values for a category data
    item.
    Categories with few distinct values, that is, fewer than five, can be used with a button
    bar.
    A button bar displays buttons in a vertical or horizontal layout.
    Categories with a moderate number of distinct values, between five and 40, can be used with
    a drop-down list.
    Categories with many distinct values, that is, more than 40, can be used with a text
    input control.
    A text input control enables a viewer to enter text in a field.
    As text is entered, the list of available values is filtered.

=== Custom Page Templates 111 ===
In addition to using SAS-provided page templates, you can also create your own custom page templates
    using the Save as Page Template option on the Page tab.
    These page templates can be used to maintain consistency between your reports.



    These custom templates can use a custom image as the thumbnail, can include data, like role
    assignments, display rules, filters, ranks, and sorting, can include the report theme,
    where the page template theme overrides the theme for the report, and can be made available
    to all users by an administrator so users can view and apply the page templates in their
    reports.
    Pages that contain the model comparison object cannot be used to create a custom page template.
    You can create custom templates of popular layouts.
    Be sure to give the custom templates meaningful names to make it easy for report designers
    to locate the template they need.



    You can also manage templates using the Manage Page Templates option on the Page tab.
    You can edit, delete, or reorder the list of templates.
    Deleting a page template does not delete any reports that use the custom page template,
    and you cannot restore a page template after deleting it.
    You must recreate it.

=== Data Source Mappings 107 ===
When adding manual actions, filter and link selection between objects that use different data sources, visual analytics prompts you to map the data sources.
    Mapping is a way to treat a value in one data source as another value in a second data source.
    Alternatively, you can globally map data sources by selecting the map data option in the data pane.



    However, when adding automatic actions, linked selection, one-way filter, and two-way filter between objects that use different data sources, you are not prompted to map data.
    You must use the map data option in the data pane to globally map data sources.


    When mapping data sources, there are some things to consider.
    A column in one data source can be mapped only once to another data source.
    If you need to use the column more than once, then you can duplicate it for mapping.
    Mapped columns must have the same format. This is very important for date columns.
    It's also important to note that if you want the actions to work, each object must use one of the mapped columns.
    Mapped columns can be added to the hidden role for mapping.

=== Data Source Mappings 200 ===
If the prompt control and the objects in the report or on a page use the same data source, an automatic filter is applied. If they use different data sources, you need to map them. Mapping is a way to treat a value in one data source as another value in a second data source.
For example, let's say we have two tables: Budgets and Reviews. The Budget table contains details about budgets for movies released in 2023. The Reviews table contains all reviews associated with 2023 movies. We would like to build a report that enables viewers to select a movie from a report prompt (the Budgets table) and see a list of reviews from that movie in the report (the Reviews table). Because the prompt and the report use a different data source, we must first tell SAS Visual Analytics which columns are common between the tables. In this case, we map the Title column (from the Budgets table) to the Movie column (in the Reviews table). When a user selects a title in the report prompt, Visual Analytics uses that value to filter the list of reviews in the report.
To determine which columns contain the same values in each data source, use list table objects or the table source viewer to view detailed data.
Data mappings can be set using the Data source menu button on the Data pane and selecting Map data or by right-clicking a prompt and selecting Edit data mappings. This opens a window where you can define the common columns between the two data sources.
When mapping data sources, there are some things to consider. A column in one data source can be mapped only once to another data source. If you need to use the column more than once, then you can duplicate it for mapping. Mapped columns must have the same format. This is very important for date columns. It's also important to note that if you want the prompts to filter the objects in the report or on the page, each object (including prompts) must use one of the mapped columns. Mapped columns can be added to the Hidden role for mapping.

=== Filter Data 525 ===
In Visual Analytics, you use filters to subset your data. There are filters available at both the report and object level. Filters are saved with the report and can be used to focus on anomalies or inconsistencies that are discovered during analysis.
Recall from earlier that we have two groups of filters. Dynamic filters, which are covered in the "Designing Interactive Reports" lesson of this course, are filters that can be modified or used by the report viewer. The second group is static filters, which we cover in this section. These static filters must be defined and applied by the report designer.
Static filters can be split between those that are applied at a report level and those that are applied at an object level.
A data source filter is a global filter that subsets data for the entire report. This filter is applied to every object that uses the data source. It acts as a pre-filter by filtering the data before it is brought into Visual Analytics. This can be seen in the updated cardinality values in the Data pane after the filter is applied.
Basic and advanced filters are object-level filters, and they subset data for individual report objects. The basic report filter subsets the object using a single data item expression, whereas the advanced report filter subsets the object using a complex expression that can contain any number of data items and operators.
A post-aggregate report filter is an object-level filter that subsets the report object using aggregated values, not individual values. These aggregated values are evaluated in the report object and are used to specify the minimum and maximum values in the selectable range.
A common filter can be a basic, advanced, or post-aggregate filter that is shared between objects. It is available across the report and can be applied to any objects using the data source.
Data source filters are used to restrict the data that is displayed in the report. To apply a data source filter, use the Data source menu and select Apply data filter. Then use the Expression Editor to define a Boolean expression to evaluate whether those rows will be returned. There is a limit of one data source filter per data source, so you might need to build a complex expression to include all the data items that you require. Verify that you are getting the expected number of returned observations for your evaluated expression.
You can use the buttons to build your expression, or you can add items freeform. You can use the filter at the top to subset the list, and hovering provides a summary of the operator or function.  When you select a function, it is displayed in the Expression Editor side pane on the right. This gives you additional drop-down menus to help build your expression, as well as additional details about the expected variables. The Results preview displays the columns used in the expression and how the filter expression is evaluated. This can be extremely useful when debugging. 
Here we see the results of an applied data source filter. Notice the Data pane cardinalities before the data source filter is applied and after. The data source filter is applied to every object in the report that uses the data source. A report with multiple data sources can have multiple data source filters, but there is a limit of one data source filter per data source. The data source filter can be a complex Boolean expression.
A basic filter is a filter that includes only one data item in the filter expression and usually uses the Filters pane to click through the steps. First you must click the object that you want to apply the filter to. Then be sure you have the Filters pane open. Third, use the New filter menu and select the data item for which you want to create a filter. Next, select the data values that you want to include. Depending on whether the data item is a measure or a category, you are presented with either continuous or discrete value options. You can use the toolbar for more filter options.
To apply an advanced filter, you again first select the object for which you want to create a filter. Then make sure you have the Filters pane open. Then use the New filter menu and select Advanced filter. Now you can use the Expression Editor to build the complex Boolean expression filter. You can use the returned observations to verify that your filter expression returns the expected results. You will be able to see the applied filter expression in the Filters pane when you have the object selected.
To apply a post-aggregate filter, you of course need to have the object selected and the Filters pane open. Then you need to select the measure data item, and you initially see the detail data values available for a basic filter. If the object that you have selected supports filtering on aggregated values, then select the Filter aggregated values option. Notice that the range of values updates to display the aggregated data values now. Look to the right of the data item name. The type of aggregation being used is listed in parentheses. By default, the aggregation type assigned to the data item is used. In this example, Product Sale is using the sum aggregation, but it would show if the data item was using average, min, max, and so on. Use the toolbar to select additional filter options. For example, you could change the condition type to include endpoints.

=== Importing Pages 120 ===
You can import pages from an existing report without having to recreate the page from scratch.
    This is useful if you have created a page that has the layout, the objects, and even the data you want to use in another report.
    The imported page retains the layout of the original page (including any containers), objects (including page prompts), data (including calculated items and parameters), and options (for the page and objects).



    Pages can be imported by selecting the Import Pages from Report option from the More button, the Snowman, for the report.
    After you select a report, you need to select which page or pages to import and then specify which actions to take on any data conflicts.



    For example, your new report may have the aggregation for profit set to sum, but the existing report has the aggregation for profit set to average.
    You'll need to specify if visual analytics should create duplicate data items for conflicts, replace existing data items in the report, keep existing data items in the report, or let me decide how to apply each data item.



    When importing pages, there are some things to consider.
    Report settings, like themes, are not retained. In addition, pages that use a model comparison object are not available for import.

=== Lesson Overview 033 ===
The reports you create in SAS Visual Analytics should be able to respond to report viewers' needs by presenting information interactively. You can make your reports concise and focus on important subsets of the data by sorting, filtering and ranking.
Creating reports with multiple pages enables you to easily organize content in your report by grouping related items together.
Prompts and actions can make your reports more versatile by enabling viewers to access the information that's important to them, even if that information is different for every viewer.

=== Limit the Visibility of a Report Page 022 ===
From the page menu, you can limit the visibility of a page. In the resulting window, you can specify users for which the page shall be visible. In addition, you have the option to automatically hide links to this page for users that cannot view it. These users who do not have access receive a notification message when they attempt to follow a text link to the page.

=== Manual Actions Filter 314 ===
Manual actions can be added between objects on a page or between controls in the report and page prompt area.
    Two types of manual actions are available, filter and linked selection.
    Filter actions enable you to subset the data to display only what is necessary to perform your analysis.
    Linked selection actions, on the other hand, highlight related data to enable users to quickly identify relationships on the page.


Filter actions can be established between objects, between a control and an object, between controls, and even between objects that use different data sources.


    Filter actions created between objects enable you to subset the data displayed in those objects.
    Filter actions make it easy for the report viewer to focus on specific areas of interest.
    All filter actions are unidirectional and transitive.



    In this example, two filter actions are established, one between the geomap and the bar chart and one between the bar chart and the tree map.
    When I select a coordinate on the geomap, the data on the bar chart and the tree map is filtered.
    Even though the filter action was not created between the geomap and the tree map, the filter is passed through the bar chart to the tree map, which reflects the transitive nature of filter actions.


Selecting a bar on the bar chart filters the data shown on the tree map but not the data shown in the geomap, which represents the unidirectional nature of filter actions.


    Some objects, however, cannot be the source of a filter action. Objects that use detailed data, like detailed list tables, bubble plots that do not use the group role,
    correlation matrices, heat maps that compare two measures and histograms, numeric series plots, scatter plots, and geocontour maps, time series plots, like the comparative time series plot, the dual axis time series plot and the time series plot,
    analytic objects, minus the ungrouped network analysis object, all statistics objects and machine learning objects.
    On the other hand, the automated prediction cannot be the target of a filter action.



    When filter actions are created between a control and an object, the control can be used to subset the data displayed in the object.
    All controls can be both the source and target of a filter action.



    When filter actions are created between two controls, they can be used to create cascading filters, which is ideal for one-to-many relationships.
    These cascading filters can be added to both the report and page-chromed areas and to the page.



    In this example, two filter actions are established, one between the button bar and the list control and one between the list control and the dropdown list control.
    Notice that when the close and choose product line is selected, the product categories in the list control are updated to show only those in the close and choose line, close, choose.
    In addition, the product groups in the dropdown list control are subset to display only those in the close and choose line, which represents the cascading nature of filter actions between controls.


When creating a filter action between objects that use different data sources, you need to specify a data source mapping.

=== Manual Actions Linked Selection 416 ===
Manual actions can be added between objects on a page or between controls in the report and page-chromed area.
    Two types of manual actions are available—filter and linked selection.
    Filter actions enable you to subset the data to display only what is necessary to perform your analysis.
    Linked selection actions, on the other hand, highlight related data to enable users to quickly identify relationships on the page.


Linked selection actions can be established between objects, between a control and an object, between controls, and even between objects that use different data sources.


    Linked selection actions created between objects enable you to highlight the same data simultaneously in those objects.
    The data for the linked selection has the same appearance in each object, which makes it easy for the report viewer to identify and compare the values.
    Linked selection actions are bi-directional and transitive.



    In this example, two linked selection actions are established—one between the geomap and the bar chart and one between the bar chart and the tree map.
    When I select a coordinate in the geomap, the associated data is highlighted on both the bar chart and the tree map.
    Even though the linked selection action was not created between the geomap and the tree map, the linked selection is passed through the bar chart to the tree map, which reflects the transitive nature of linked selection actions.


Selecting a bar in the bar chart highlights the data shown in the tree map and the data shown in the geomap, which represents the bi-directional nature of linked selection actions.


    The linked selection highlights a percentage of the object that reflects the number of shared observations in the data set.
    In this example, Turkey represents 69% of all the countries in Asia.
    When a linked selection action is added between the geomap and the tree map and Turkey is selected in the geomap, 69% of the Asia tile is highlighted.
    This works because the tree map is using frequency to size the tiles. The linked selection does not highlight a percentage for any other measures.



    When linked selection actions are created between a control and an object, the control can be used to highlight the associated data in the object.
    In this case, the linked selection action is unidirectional and transitive.



    In this example, two linked selection actions are established, one between the button bar and the bar chart and one between the bar chart and the tree map.
    When I select a value on the button bar, the associated data is highlighted on both the bar chart and the tree map.
    Even though the linked selection action was not created between the button bar and the tree map, the linked selection is passed through the bar chart to the tree map, which reflects the transitive nature of linked selection actions.


Selecting a bar in the bar chart, however, will highlight the data shown in the tree map, but not the data in the button bar, which represents the unidirectional nature of linked selection actions between a control and an object.


    When linked selection actions are created between two controls, they can be used to create progressive filters, which is ideal for many-to-many relationships.
    When linked selection actions are defined between controls, there is no visual highlighting or shading to indicate associated data, but the order of the values does change to show those with data first.
    It's recommended that you add a measure to the control, like frequency or frequency percent, so that the viewer can easily determine which values have data.



    In this example, one linked selection action is established between the button bar and the list control.
    Notice that when the sports product line is selected, the product categories in the list control are reordered to display the ones from the sports line first.
    In addition, the remaining product lines show a frequency of zero, which indicates that those product categories are not in the sports product line.



    Linked selection actions between controls are also bidirectional and transitive.
    Controls can be the target of a linked selection action only if the source is another control.


When creating a linked selection action between objects that use different data sources, you need to specify a data source mapping.

=== Page Templates 317 ===
SAS Visual Analytics provides six-page templates to help you easily create reports, brand,
    dashboard, panel, scrolling, stack, and tile.
    Each page template contains multiple objects and predefined actions between those objects.



    The brand template can be used to create an overview page for your report.
    It contains an image object for the company logo, several key-value objects to display
    important indicators, and a time series plot to show historical data.
    The dashboard template can be used to create a page that functions as a dashboard.
    It contains several key-value objects to display important indicators, a time series plot to
    show historical data, and a list table to display detailed data.
    In addition, one-way filter automatic actions are defined between all objects.



    The panel template can be used to create a page with a clear division between objects
    that enable viewers to select data of interest, a button bar, a pie chart, and a list control.
    And objects in a scrolling container that display details, two-line charts, and a list
    table in a stacking container and a bar chart.
    In addition, one-way filter automatic actions are defined between all objects.
    The scrolling template can be used to create a page that scrolls like a website.
    It contains an image object for the hero or introductory image, text objects for the
    page title and descriptions, a geomap object to show details by location, two key-value
    objects to display important indicators, and a bar chart.



    The stack template can be used to create a page that enables viewers to focus on data
    of interest.
    It contains page prompts to filter the page, a drop-down list control and list control,
    text objects for the page title and descriptions, a stacking container with a bar chart and
    a list table to show details, and two key-value objects to display important indicators.
    In addition, one-way filter automatic actions are defined between all objects.
    The tile template can be used to create a page of separate tiles.
    It contains a geomap object to show details by location, a time series plot to show historical
    data, and a stacking container with a list table and a text object for a description.



    You can use page templates to quickly create pages and modify them as necessary to soup
    your needs.
    First, you add a page template to your report.
    Then, you can add data to the objects, modify the layout of the objects, and modify the
    actions between the objects.
    Page templates can be added directly from the canvas when you create a new report or
    when you add a new page to the report.
    The page can use multiple data sources.
    The layout can be modified by rearranging objects, deleting objects, or adding new objects.
    And actions can be modified from the actions pane.

  
    These page templates were designed using reporting best practices, which you can see from the
    SAS Beautiful Reports website, www.sas.com slash beautifulreports.
    The color palette available for the page templates depend on the active themes for the application
    and for the report.

=== Prompts 033 ===
Prompts can make your reports more versatile by enabling viewers to access the information
    that's important to them by filtering. Prompts are control objects that are placed
    in a special area on the canvas. Two types of prompts are available. Report prompts that
    subset all the data in the report, and page prompts that subset all the data on a single page.
    If the control object and the objects in the report or on the page use the same data source,
    an automatic filter is applied. If they do not, you need to specify a data source mapping.

=== Rank Data 133 ===
A rank filters the values of a category based on the aggregated measure by the top or bottom count or percent of the values, which can be a manually entered value or a value driven by a parameter. The measure can be a data item or a calculated item. A rank greatly reduces the visible categories to make it easier to focus on the top value or bottom value that interests a user. You have the option to include or exclude tie values. The All visible categories option is available only for list tables.
Here are the steps to add a rank. First, select the object to make it the active object. Then make sure you have the Ranks pane open. Third, use the New rank menu and select the category data item that you want to subset. In this example, select a data item that has been assigned a Data role in the bar chart, Product Make. Then you can use the fields to define the rank. Select whether you want the top or bottom count or percentage. Then select the count of the category data item that you want returned for the rank. This can be a numeric parameter. Then you need to select the measure data item that you want used in the rank when determining the top or bottom data values. This measure is aggregated to the selected category data item used in the rank definition. Lastly, you can select whether you want to include ties or include the All Other grouping. And then you have your object with rank applied. You can use this to show the top 5 products, a rolling 13-month window, or even the bottom 5% of performers.

=== Report and Page Prompts 217 ===
Report prompts filter all objects in the report, including page prompts.
    Page prompts filter all objects in a single page.



    By default, the report and page-prompt areas are hidden.
    You can expand the report prompt area by clicking the Expand Report Control area button, the
    arrow, at the top of the canvas, or by selecting the Expand Report Controls, or Expand Report
    Controls and All Page Controls options from the More button, (the snowman) for the report.



    You can expand the page-prompt area by clicking the Expand Page Control area button, the
    arrow, at the top of the page by selecting the Expand Report Controls and All Page Controls
    option from the More button, (the snowman) for the report, or by selecting the Expand Page
    Controls, or Expand All Page Controls options on the Page tab.



    By default, the report prompt area is displayed at the top of the canvas and the page-prompt
    area is displayed at the top of the page.
    You can specify options at the report or page level to change the placement of the controls
    to the left, bottom, or right side of the canvas.
    You can also modify settings to set the placement of the report prompt area, default report
    controls placement, and page-prompt area, default page controls placement for all reports.



    If the prompt areas are on the left or right side, you can specify the width of the area.
    In addition, a list control object can be added.
    When adding report or page-prompts to the side, consider modifying the orientation of
    wide controls, like sliders and button bars, to maximize space.



    If multiple controls are added to the report or page-prompt area, the filters are combined
    with an AND operator.
    You can also add actions between control objects so that selecting a value in one control will
    filter the list of available values in the other controls, cascading controls.
    When using multiple controls, consider placing all controls inside a prompt container.
    Prompt containers enable you to minimize the space for controls by grouping them together.
    When using prompt controls, the execution of actions to objects outside the prompt container
    are delayed until you click Apply, which enables you to select values for multiple controls
    and apply them all at once.

=== Sort Custom and Multi-Column 321 ===
Information can be easier to understand when it appears in an intentional order. Visual Analytics enables you to define a custom sort order for category data items. And there is a multiple column sort available for the list table object. Notice that in the bar chart, you can right-click anywhere on the axis to access the sort menu.
The ability to sort data enables you to interactively change the order of data to provide a different perspective. In looking at these two screenshots, which is easier to identify the top Sales Rep ratings? The screenshot on the right, which has a descending sort on Sales Rep Rating for both the list table and bar chart, should help to more quickly identify the top ratings.
You can create a custom sort for the distinct values in a category data item so that they sort in a non-default way. By default, the values in a category data item sort alphabetically. To define a custom sort, right-click a data item and select Custom sort. Next, move the values from the left pane to the Sorted Items pane in the desired sort order. You can use the arrows on the left to adjust values up and down as necessary. The data items not specified in the Sorted items pane are displayed in alphabetical (default) order. Now we can see our list table with the default sort order and after with the custom sort defined. You would use a custom sort when you want to focus on data values out of the default order. In this case, I was interested in the promotional products and the stores or kiosks people can visit in person.
The list table object has many unique features, and one of the exclusive elements is its support of a multiple column sort, sometimes referred to as multi-column sort. By default, as you can see here, list tables are automatically sorted in ascending order by the first data item added to the table. To add a secondary sort, right-click the column heading and select Sort, and then select the option with the words Add Ascending or Add Descending. This adds a secondary sort, tertiary sort, or additional sorts. If you were to select one of the top options without Add before Ascending or Descending, you would be selecting the primary sort.
Alternatively, you can use the key combination Ctrl Click on the column heading to add additional sorting.
Here is the same list table, but with multi-column sorts applied in different orders. If you were to right-click in both list tables and view the sort, you would see the same sort selections, but the order in which the sorts are applied is not shown. First, we selected Product Brand. We can always identify the primary sort because the primary sort has the largest sort arrow. Second, I applied an ascending sort to Transaction Month on the left and an ascending sort to Product Line on the right. We can see how this differs for each list table. We can also see in the Product Line column how our custom sort is applied. Third, I applied an ascending sort to Product Line on the left and an ascending sort to Transaction Month on the right. Again, notice that the custom sort order is applied. Our fourth and final sort is applied to the Product Sale column in descending order. If you click any column heading, the primary sort changes, and all subsequently added sorts are removed. Also keep in mind that there is no way to identify the order in which the sorts are applied.

=== Sort Filter and Rank Data 032 ===
In this lesson, we learn about how to sort data in the Visual Analytics report. We also look at filtering our data. There are two main types of filters: static filters and dynamic filters. In this lesson, we focus on the static filters, which include: the data source filter, basic filter, advanced filter, post-aggregate filter, and common filter. The dynamic filters are covered in the "Designing Interactive Reports" lesson. The last section focuses on how to add a rank to the data.

=== Types of Pages 207 ===
Reports in SAS Visual Analytics contain multiple pages to present different parts of your data
    story.
    Each page can use multiple data sources and contain multiple objects.
    When your report contains more than one page, it's a best practice to give the pages meaningful
    names.
    Pages can be basic, the default, hidden, or pop-up.



    The report must have a minimum of two pages to change the page type.
    If the report has only one page, the page must be a basic page.
    The page type can be specified using the Page Type option on the Page tab or in the Options
    pane.



    Basic is the default type for pages.
    Each report must have at least one basic page.
    Basic pages are visible to report designers and report viewers as a page tab and can be
    the source of links.
    These pages are useful to advance the data story and typically focus on one aspect of
    that story.



    Hidden pages are visible to report designers as a page tab but not to report viewers unless
    they are the target of a link.
    In view mode, a linked hidden page will appear like a regular page.
    It takes up the entire screen and can include links to other reports, pages, or external
    URLs.
    This type of page is useful for pages that are under construction or to provide information
    to other report designers about the report, like the revision history and notes about
    creating the report.



    Pop-up pages are also visible to report designers as a page tab but not to report viewers unless
    they are the target of a link.
    In view mode, a linked pop-up page will appear in a window that takes up a portion of the
    screen.
    Pop-up pages can include links to external URLs but cannot be the source of a link to
    other reports or pages.
    This type of page is useful for providing information to report viewers on how to navigate
    the report, like detailed tips on how to use the report, descriptions of report objects,
    and information about actions and links, or to provide detailed data.
    When your report contains pop-up pages, be sure to include instructions to report viewers
    on how to access those pages.

=== Working with Multiple Pages 120 ===
The goal of reporting is to tell a single data story.
    Many times, that story can be told in multiple parts.
    That's where multiple pages are useful.


    
    Each page in your report should focus on one aspect of the story
    and tell that piece with a limited number of objects, four to six.
    Not only that, but you must ensure that each page can stand on its own.
    Viewers should not be expected to remember details from one page
    to understand the concepts that are communicated on another page.
    Basically, you want to ensure that each page communicates
    one point that advances your data story.



    In addition to adding multiple pages to your report,
    you can create pages that provide additional details to report viewers,
    kitten pages, and pop-up pages.
    These pages can be used to communicate details about the report to other designers,
    or they can be linked to from an object on a regular page
    to enable viewers to see additional details.



    There is no limit to the number of pages that can be added to a report
    or the number of objects that can be added to a page.
    However, it is a good idea to limit the number of pages
    to make your report easier to access, easier to navigate,
    and easier to understand.
    If you need more than six or seven visible pages to tell your data story,
    you should consider creating multiple reports
    and use links between them to provide additional information.

=== Automatic Chart 336 ===
It's time to get started using SAS Visual Analytics. One of the most powerful features of SAS Visual Analytics is to let it help identify relationships and trends in your data for you and using the automatic chart feature is one capability. The automatic chart gives a quick view of the data and selects the best chart type. To have Visual Analytics create an automatic chart, we will follow these steps: create a new report, add data to the report, drag data items onto the report, and then identify and make data item property adjustments like the aggregation type used or if a category should be classified as a geography.
First thing we need to do is create a new report.
Next, we need to add data to the report. We will use the add data button and it will open the choose data window. Then I will type the table name and it will filter the list of available data already loaded into CAS. Next, select the table and then click add.
Now that we have our data source added to the report, we can select data items and drag them onto the report canvas. This will create an automatic chart whose type is determined by the number and type of data items dragged onto the canvas. In this example, when I select four measures, I get a correlation matrix that shows the linear relationship between those measures.
In this example, I first selected the top data item then used the toolbar to use the select all data items option. Then I drag all the data items onto the report canvas which will create a list table auto chart. Here we can inspect and identify any data items that need property adjustments to make better sense in our discovery phase. I notice a country column, this can be converted to a geographic data item. I also see in the table a percentage data item, the default aggregation is sum and I know that it would be best to use the average aggregation for a percentage data item.
Now we can actually make those data item property adjustments. In the Data pane, find the data item and expand its properties using the chevrons. Next, find the property you want to change, in this case we will change the country data item from a category classification to a geography. The edit geography interface will open automatically. We can leave the name, use the out-of-the-box option of geography name or code lookup and then remembering our data values listed country names, we will use the context of country or region names. Looking to the right, we can see that one hundred percent of our data values were mapped successfully.
The second data item property we wanted to change is for the measure data item using the percent format to use the aggregation type of average.
Now we repeat the steps to explore our data by dragging and dropping data items onto the report canvas to produce automatic charts. Notice now with the different classification, we will get a geo map when using a geographic data item. And the average aggregation of percentage makes it easy to see that the Outdoors Product Line is offering more discounts, on average, than the other Product Lines.
Leveraging the automatic charting feature is one of the fastest ways to get started in Visual Analytics. You may be happy with the generated automatic chart, or you may, once you see the auto chart, decide that you want to see the data using a different visualization. You can easily change the object type. Use the object's toolbar and at the bottom select the change to option and then select your desired object. In this example, I'll change the bar chart to a box plot. This gives me additional insight as to where the bulk of discount percentages are given within each Product Line.

=== Lesson Overview 020 ===
In this getting started with Visual Analytics, we will have a quick welcome to the application, then take a look at three ways we can explore our data quickly and build reports fast. Lastly, we will see an overview of SAS Viya and a high-level architecture and how Visual Analytics uses CAS to surface report results.

=== New Calculated Items 155 ===
The last thing we want to add to our report is a simple calculated item. We will first need to create a new data item. Define the expression. And then we will need to add the new calculation to the report.
In this case, we are working from the previous section where we have already added and configured our page template. From the Data pane, use the New data item menu and select Calculated item. The New Calculated Item window will open automatically.
Now we need to define the expression for Profit, which equals the Total Revenue minus in parenthesis Quantity Ordered times Unit Cost. We will cover the expression builder in much greater detail later in the course, but for now we will use our keyboard to type the operators and use the Data drop-down to select the data items in the order we need them. Once we have the expression defined, we can enter a name and pick a format.
Next we add it to the report. To do that we will need a new object on our report. Like we mentioned earlier when we deleted an object from the page template, once you add the page template to your report you can make any changes you like. So, let's add our new calculated item as another key value object. I'm going to click on the last key value object to make it the active object. Then use the object's toolbar to select duplicate.
Click on the duplicated object to make it the active object then use the Data Roles pane to replace the data item with our new calculated item.
And this is our final report. We created this interactive report extremely fast. We updated data item properties to name the data items to eliminate confusion, made changes to aggregation types to better align with the data item being represented, and we even created a simple calculated item and added it to the report. Users can use this report to look at different ranges of time by using the interactive slider at the bottom.

=== Page Templates and Actions 456 ===
In keeping with the theme of getting started with SAS Visual Analytics, I want to give you all of the tools to get building reports fast. There are two key features that can help you get started quickly and that is using Page Templates and Automatic Actions. Starting with the same steps that we've seen in the previous sections, first create a new report, and add data to the report. Next, select a page template, then assign object roles and make any data item property adjustments then explore the predefined actions.
First we need to create a new report. Next, we need to add data to the report. We will use the add data button and it will open the choose data window. Then I will type the table name and it will filter the list of available data already loaded into CAS. Next, select the table and then click add.
Use the select a template button from the report canvas to open the available out-of-the-box report templates. These templates are shipped with Visual Analytics and available to all users. We will see later in the course how we can create our own page templates. For this example, we will select the first template named brand. Click the add button to insert it into the page.
Now we have our page template added to the report canvas and we can see the objects included. We can see an image and title object at the top. Then we have four key value objects side by side. Then we have a time series plot and under that we have a range slider that will filter the report based on the selected dates. Now it's time to assign Data Roles to each object. Let's start with the time series plot in the middle. There are many ways to assign data items to an object's roles, but let's look at two ways.
First, you can use the assign data button on the object. When you click the assign data button, you will be presented with the roles that can be assigned. If the role has a red asterisk next to it, then it is a required role. Use the add button to select from the available data items for the data source. In this case, the time axis role requires a date/datetime data item. We will pick the Date Order was place by Customer data item. Then click close.
The second way to specify object roles is to use the Data Roles pane. First, select the object we want to assign roles to and then expand the Data Roles pane. Notice that next to each role grouping, like with the assign data button, the required roles are designated with a red asterisk. Also notice that the Data Roles pane has additional roles available, like the data tip values and hidden roles. Use the add button to select from a list of available data items in the data source. For the measure role, we will select the Quantity Ordered data item. Then click apply.
You've seen how to use the assign data button and Data Roles pane to select data items for object roles, but not all objects use the Data Roles pane. Here, we will configure the image object. You can use the button on the image object or you can use the Options pane to select an image. You can browse to select a local image or an image available to the SAS Viya environment. You can resize the image object by grabbing the edges of the object and dragging it to the desired size. Be sure to include tooltip text to assist screen readers.
The text object is another object that uses a different technique to customize. You can see from the Data Roles pane, you can assign measure and parameter data items but to add free form text, you can either double-click on the text object or use the toolbar menu and click edit. Once you see the rich text editor you can leverage the existing font style and color formatting to edit your text. You can even include some of the provided dynamic text data items such as the Table Modified Time.
You can customize the page templates once you have it added to your report. In this example, you can use the object's toolbar to delete any unused objects.
The next step is to adjust any data items properties once you have assigned all your object's data roles. As we've seen in the previous examples, use the Data pane and expand the data item's properties. Then you can edit the data item name, and, in this example, we changed the aggregation type from the default sum to average. Repeat the process for any other data items.
Here is the report before the property adjustments and here is after the property adjustments. We can see that the new data names are much clearer and the average aggregation changes make better sense for both the percentage and the unit cost.
For the last step, explore the page template's predefined actions. In this page template, I'm going to select the slider object at the bottom of the report. Notice in the Actions pane that the slider object is configured to filter all the objects on the page except the text object. Actions are used to direct attention to specific results. Use the end points on the slider object to filter the displayed date range.

=== Suggest Pane 423 ===
The second capability that SAS Visual Analytics has to help identify relationships and trends in your data is the Suggest Pane. The Suggest pane generates objects to help you consider new visualizations for your data. To use suggested objects, first create a new report, add data to the report, then open the Suggest pane and browse the suggested objects. You can add the ones you like to your report but also identify and make data item adjustments like the aggregation type used, if a category should be classified as a geography, or if you need to hide data items.
Suggestions are objects that are generated for the data source and are driven by data item cardinality, the number of unique values for a category data item, and correlations, the statistical measure that expresses the extent two measure data items are linearly related. Use the scroll bar to browse the suggested objects. The refresh button generates new suggested objects. The more button generates more suggested objects and appends them to the list. Once a suggested object is removed from the list, such as being added to your report, then those data items that were used in that object will not be used again by the new suggested objects. You can use the Suggestions pane to learn your data and build reports fast.
Like with Automatic Charts, first thing we need to do is create a new report.
Next, we need to add data to the report. We will use the add data button and it will open the choose data window. Then I will type the table name and it will filter the list of available data already loaded into CAS. Next, select the table and then click add.
Use the light bulb icon to open the Suggest Pane. Use the scroll bar, more and refresh buttons to browse the suggested objects. To add objects to the report, you can use the gripper icon at the top of the object and drag it onto the canvas. Or you can right-click on the object and click add to current or new page. Remember, if you use or delete an object from the suggest pane then those data items used in that object are not reused in newly generated objects.
Similar to when using automatic charts, pay attention and identify any data items that are not being used correctly in the suggested objects. For example, you may notice that percent data items are using the default sum aggregation when it should use average. Or if you identify a country data item that can be changed to a geography classification. While the geographic classifications produced impactful geo maps using the automatic charts feature, suggested objects do not produce geographic objects. Finally, look for any data items that have a high cardinality that aren't producing meaningful visualizations, and you can hide these data items temporarily while browsing the suggested objects. As an adjacent benefit, you can quickly spot outliers, like the one employee ID that has a high frequency and investigate further.
These are the same data item property adjustments we made for the automatic chart. Use the Data pane, find the data item and expand its properties using the chevrons. Next, find the property you want to change, in this case we will change the country data item from a category classification to a geography. The edit geography interface will open automatically. We can leave the name, use the out-of-the-box option of geography name or code lookup and then remembering our data values listed country names, we will use the context of country or region names. Looking to the right, we can see that one hundred percent of our data values were mapped successfully.
The second data item property we wanted to change is for the measure data item using the percent format to use the aggregation type of average.
Recall that the generated suggested objects will use the available data items in the data pane; therefore, we can hide any data items we don't want used by the suggest pane. To do this, open the Data pane and then for the desired data source, use the toolbar menu and select Show or hide data items. Then from the Show or Hide Data Items window, move any displayed data items to the hidden side using the arrows in the middle. You can show or hide data items at any time when designing your report.
Repeat the steps to browse suggested objects and add them to the report. This is a great way to get started building reports fast as well as explore your data to make any property adjustments so that your visuals make sense and tie into your data story.

=== Viya CAS and Visual Analytics 355 ===
We have seen how we can quickly get started using SAS Visual Analytics. Now let's take a look at the high-level architecture of SAS Viya and CAS. We'll give a quick overview of single versus multi-threaded processing. And finally we'll see how Visual Analytics is a CAS client which means we'll look at how Visual Analytics requests and receives responses from CAS.
CAS stands for the Cloud Analytic Services and is SAS's latest and most powerful analytic engine. It is pronounced like 'SAS' not 'jazz'. CAS has a unique proprietary data architecture which is a combination of resident memory, virtual memory, and permanent, on-disk storage. As you can see in the high-level architecture diagram, CAS is the analytic engine for SAS Viya but there are other supporting services. There are stateful services, stateless services, and other services that support the infrastructure of SAS Viya.
CAS is designed for multi-threaded processing, even in single machine architectures. In a CAS single machine deployment, the CAS Controller and CAS Worker are the same server. In a CAS multi-machine deployment, there is the CAS Controller and then one or more CAS Workers. As client requests come in for analytic responses, the CAS Controller sends the requests down to the appropriate workers and then aggregates the results before responding to the client.
Let's take a look at SAS Visual Analytics using CAS. Here we can see that Visual Analytics is referred to as a client. Any web application making a request of CAS is called a client.
When you create an object in Visual Analytics, the client will send a request to CAS. CAS, similar to a data warehouse, contains all the data. The Controller then instructs the CAS Workers and their analytic engines to perform the requested operations on the data that is available to them. The CAS Workers then send their results back to the CAS Controller for final aggregation and to apply any post processing actions, such as rank. Then the CAS Controller sends the results back to the client. The results are structured data only, not tables or charts.
What is a Visual Analytics report? Here we can see a browser rendered Visual Analytics report. We can see images, text, key values, a time series chart and a date slider prompt. Under the covers though, the structure of a Visual Analytics report is called the BIRD which stands for the Business Intelligence Report Definition. Here is a screenshot of the XML structure but you could also view it in JSON. This is the "recipe" or "map" that the browser uses to render the graphics of the report. The returned CAS results are embedded within the BIRD.
Here is the Visual Analytics request for one of the key value objects. CAS requests can be in the form of CASL, which is the CAS Language, or in the form of CAS Actions. In this example, we can see that a CAS Action of simple summary is being requested for this key value object. It will pass all of the information to CAS to complete the request such as CAS Library name, table name, data items, aggregation type, etc. This is done for every object in the report. The request will also include any filters configured for the report object.
Here is an example CAS response. Remember, CAS only returns structured data that the client will render into a graphic. Here we can see in the response the object's size, formatting details and data value which is, in this case, an array of one element named CDATA and the value 77.432363etc. This is the value that feeds this key value object.
This should be familiar to you now. The important things to remember are: clients, like Visual Analytics, are responsible for rendering the visualizations. And CAS returns structured data results only.

=== Welcome 207 ===
Welcome to SAS Visual Analytics. After you log on, you'll see the Home Page. You can navigate to other SAS applications, search for existing content, and create a new report from the home page.
The Home Page is the launching point that allows you to explore data, design reports, view reports, organize and manage content using SAS Visual Analytics. You can toggle between either a Tile View and Table View. The Table View is what we are seeing now. You can also use the link at the top to return to the SAS Visual Analytics Home Page.
On the left side of the Home Page, at the top we have the Applications menu. This enables you to access other SAS applications. Next, we see the Search and the Folders Directory. The search supports two types of searches, free text and faceted, which you can mix and match in a single query. Faceted searches just means you can specify facets such as Name or DateModified. When looking at the Folders directory, many of these folders are self-explanatory such as Recent, My Favorites and My Folder. The SAS Content folder allows you to navigate the SAS Content directory in your SAS Viya environment. The Shared with Me folder lists the content that has been shared with you. It is not a copy of the content, but a link for you to be able to quickly open the content. The Recycle Bin stores deleted content until it is permanently deleted. The Recommended folder lists recommended reports based on other users' recent actions on the report, such as opening, sharing or adding comments.
On the right side of the Home Page, we have the New report button. This opens a blank report for you to start designing. It also resets the previous session recovery point. The Restore previous session link restores all open reports that were interrupted and includes any changes that were made but perhaps not saved. The remaining links take you to the What's New in SAS Visual Analytics and the Beautiful Reports SAS recommendations on how to create a compelling data story by designing a report that is both visually appealing and easy to understand.

=== Custom Web App with SAS Viya SDK 307 ===
When working with SAS Visual Analytics reports, you can of course customize the reports, but sometimes you can hit limitations, or you might want to work with reports or objects offline to save resources, or give access to SAS reports without providing access to SAS Visual Analytics.
In these cases, you can build your own web application to display reports, pages, or objects, or integrate the SAS objects in an existing portal or web page.
This is where SAS Viya SDKs can be used.
When working with the SAS Viya SDKs, you can of course use the connected approach, which integrates the elements and connects to the SAS Viya server to retrieve data, or you can use the export package. The connected approach offers the same experience as you would expect using SAS Visual Analytics directly, but the SAS report package might limit some interactions because only the needed data is exported in this standalone version of the report.
When you export the package, you can select a subset of objects and where the exported package will be exported. If you choose not to save to the SAS content, you will download the package on your desktop.
Also note that the time needed to generate the package and its size will be impacted by the number of object interactions. For this reason, the package is generated in background and you will get a notification when the generation is completed.
After downloading, you can unzip the package and consume the content using the included index.html file.
As soon as you have explored and deployed the report package, the question about refreshing the data will pop up. To ease and automate that process, you can use the sas-viya CLI. This command line tool can be used to perform other administrative tasks, but it is really useful to automate the process of refreshing the report package. Combined with orchestration tools like Jenkins, you can automate the extraction and the deployment of the report package. This would enable you to refresh the data at a predefined pace or on demand when a defined event occurs.
As mentioned, depending on the object types, you might get different support levels:
no support including objects that cannot be rendered in an offline report;
basic support including objects that use only basic queries and most interactivity is supported but data limits apply; and finally
full support including objects with no known limitations.
To find more information about the support levels, connect to the support.sas.com page.
While building custom web application using the SAS Viya SDKs in interactive mode, you need to properly configure your SAS Viya environment. This can be done using SAS Environment Manager. You need to set up CORS, CSRF, and Cross-Site cookies properly.
Guest Access is also possible but not mandatory. It is up to the administrator to decide whether unauthenticated users should be authorized to access the data.
On the client side, you have two options to integrate the needed JavaScript libraries. You can point to the SAS CDN (Content Delivery Network) or install the packages and include them in the deployed application.

=== Lesson Overview 022 ===
When viewing SAS Visual Analytics reports, you have multiple options going from the SAS Applications that run on web browser technology to mobile devices to embedding SAS Visual Analytics reports and/or elements in custom web applications using the SAS Viya SDKs to using SAS with third-party software like Microsoft Office tools.

=== Mobile App 113 ===
When consuming reports, you are not always at your desk. In such a case, the SAS Visual Analytics App for mobile devices is the way to go.
The SAS Visual Analytics App can connect to SAS Visual Analytics 7.5 and higher. It is available on the major app stores. You can find the information about the supported OS versions in the SAS documentation. Windows users can use the Progressive Web App.
Out of the box, the application provides a Discovery mode. You don't need to define a connection. SAS gives you access to some reports to familiarize you with the application and its usage.
You can use the provided connection, but accessing your own report and data is more relevant.
The application can connect to different SAS Visual Analytics versions, and you might even have multiple environments available. The first step after exploring the application is to connect to your SAS server. You can use the same server information as when connecting to SAS Visual Analytics.
If you are using geographic maps and you want to access the premium features of Esri, you should specify the user ID and the password for the Esri user. This will give you access to advanced Esri features and will also use credits from the account.

=== Progressive Web Application PWA 145 ===
The previous section covered viewing reports in a web browser. If you want to have a more desktop application-like behavior, you can choose to install the SAS Visual Analytics progressive web application, PWA.
The PWA installs the web application on the desktop like any other application. Behind the scenes, it will run the application in a browser without displaying the navigation bar or the bookmark bar that a browser usually provides. Instead, you have the look and feel of a desktop application. You can use a shortcut to access it and place it on your desktop, for example. This approach also improves the user experience as it reduces the time to load and displays the application as it reduces the network usage. When the application is updated on the server, the application stored on the desktop will be synchronized automatically without any user action. Furthermore, by default, your session will never time out, so you can restart your work more quickly. Your administrator can enable a time-out for the PWA using the sas.htmlcommons configuration property in SAS Environment Manager.
To install the Progressive Web Application, you must first be signed in to the desired application, in this case SAS Visual Analytics. When you are signed in, then you can use the button that appears to install the site as an application. Pro Tip: Name the Progressive Web Application the same name as the SAS product that you are signed in to.
Depending on your browser, you might have to install the Progressive Web Application from a different menu. You can have multiple installations of the PWA, be sure to name the app to reflect the environment it points to.
Use the browser's Apps page to uninstall any SAS Progressive Web Applications.

=== SAS for Microsoft 365 215 ===
Working with SAS Visual Analytics reports inside a browser is fine, but sometimes you want to integrate some visuals or data into Microsoft Analytics tools.
It is possible to access SAS Visual Analytics reports since SAS9. The approach in SAS9 and Viya 3.5 is the same. You connect through the COM provider to the SAS server and access the data and report. Starting with SAS Viya 4, SAS for Microsoft 365 Office Add-in uses the APIs provided by Microsoft to develop add-ins.
If you try to map the different technologies used throughout the integration with Microsoft office tools, you can see that the earlier technologies were bound to desktop usage and were not easing the collaboration between users. With the new technologies, we have a more flexible approach, which has a positive impact on how you develop the add-ins as they are based on web technologies. And this also improves the collaboration between users.
Due to the new technologies used behind the scenes, installing SAS for Microsoft 365 is as easy as installing a manifest file that contains the information about the application and then configuring the SAS environment to enable the usage of SAS for Microsoft 365.
As soon as this is done and after restarting a few pods, you can use the client inside Microsoft Office 365.
Using SAS for Microsoft 365, you can navigate SAS content to explore the available resources and get information about these resources.
As soon as you have identified the report, you can open it and insert specific objects into your document whether an Excel file, a PowerPoint presentation, or a Word document.
SAS for Microsoft 365 also lets you work directly with the underlying data of the report object. This is handy if you prefer to use native Excel functionalities on the SAS data.
If you are a SAS programmer, there is no need to switch to another interface. You can code right inside SAS for Microsoft 365 and execute on the compute server as if you were using SAS Studio or using other tools. This can be useful if you want to query a database to compare results displayed in an object with your results based on the same underlying data.

=== Web Browser 635 ===
Let's focus on the functionality while viewing SAS Visual Analytics reports from a web browser.
SAS recommends using the latest versions of the supported web browsers and has minimum hardware requirements. There are some additional settings and features that can be selected when viewing SAS Visual Analytics reports in a web browser.
You can view SAS Visual Analytics reports from a desktop computer, using one of these supported web browsers: Apple Safari, Google Chrome, Microsoft Edge on Chromium, Mozilla Firefox.
The browser must be enabled for JavaScript. Touch-enabled devices such as tablets, iPads, touch screens, and mobile phones are not supported and must use the Visual Analytics mobile application.
Because SAS software is not installed on client machines, the requirements are minimal. The following minimum resources are recommended for client machines: a minimum of two CPU cores and 16 GB of RAM.
Many options are available for configuring your viewer experience in a web browser. Specifically, Visual Analytics provides functionalities to display geographic data on maps.
As an end user, you can specify your desired default map provider. Initially, the default provider is set to use OpenStreetMap as the background for the geographic objects.
You can change the distance unit that suits your needs.
You can also use Esri ArcGIS Online Services' free and subscription-based offerings. You need to accept the Terms and Conditions in order to access the Esri maps.
You can access the free version without authenticating against Esri servers, but you should have a registered Esri user to benefit from the extra capabilities provided by the subscription-based version.
When consuming or editing reports, SAS Visual Analytics uses your browser settings for the language of the user interface. If you want to switch to another language, you should adapt your preferred language settings at the browser level. SAS Visual Analytics also gives the opportunity to change the locale for regional formats and sorting. This option is set by default to match the Browser locale, but you can change it to your preferred language. Note that this modification will impact only the formats used in the data and the sorting order. It will not impact the label of the variables or the values of the data.
When designing the reports, the report author has the opportunity to set the customization level offered to the report consumers. Depending on the level, the report viewer will be allowed to adapt the legends and the value labels, switch from one object type to another, or even change the data assignments, filters, ranks, and so on.
If you need to enforce additional report viewing restrictions on exporting data, images, PDF files, and/or report packages use the export option. You can enable export or disable export and select one or a combination of the available options. If you have the SAS Information Governance license you can disable export functionality if there is private data present.
You can view and edit the source table for a data source in a Visual Analytics report from view mode. This is only available for CAS source tables. By default, Authenticated Users can view and Application Administrators can view and edit source tables. Administrators can change permissions using SAS Environment Manager. To save edits, the user must have write permission to the save location.
You can use the view and edit source table feature to make last minute data value edits for small to medium datasets.
Depending on the customization level offered to a specific user, the side pane will display different content and control access to certain functionalities.
While using SAS Visual Analytics, the end-user can check information about the report such as the creation, the modification, the location, and also the report summary.
It is possible to open multiple reports simultaneously and to switch from one to the other.
As each opened report consumes browser resources, it is always a good idea to close unused reports to free up resources.
When working with reports, you often need to share the report with colleagues. One technique to do it is to use the Copy Link functionality.
When copying the link, you have multiple options: you can provide the link for a Guest user if the user is not registered to authenticate in SAS and Guest access has been configured for the environment, enabling the user to interact with the report or providing a static view of the data.
It is also possible to choose which element of SAS Visual Analytics is displayed, such as the application banner, the menu bar, and whether the page navigation is enabled.
If the report contains parameters, it's also possible to pass parameters in the form of URL parameters to define a specific selection for the consumer of the link.
You can also copy the embeddable markup code that can be used in the SAS Viya SDK for JavaScript to build custom web applications. You can select to generate code for guest access, an interactive report element, or static image.
Guest Access provides anonymous Read-Only access to reports.
Guest is an internal user to the SAS Viya environment and individual users do not provide unique sign in credentials.
In order to enable guest access, an administrator must create a new configuration in SAS Environment Manager for the sas.logon.provider.guest definition.
Then an administrator with superuser privileges can use the CLI (command-line interface) to modify the authorization rules to grant read access to the desired CAS libraries.
Lastly, the administrator must configure read access to the SAS Content folders and reports for the guest user.
Sometimes when sharing reports with other users, you want to add comments. It can be interesting to discuss with other report authors. Report consumers might also want to exchange information about the content of the report or ask questions about data.
To enable comments, the users should have specific rights. These rights can be set through SAS Environment Manager by an administrator.
SAS Visual Analytics also provides a technique to play reports on larger screens (for example, at a welcome desk in an office or as a main source of information in a department). You can set the delay between each page change.
You can also decide whether you display a timer to indicate how much time remains before the next page change and what is displayed on the screen. For example, in the page control area, you might want to display the report on a touchscreen, leaving the viewer the choice to move back and forth when you are at a tradeshow.

=== Box Plots 249 ===
Box plots are useful for viewing information about the variability and extreme values of a measure between groups. Box plots are especially useful for showing survey or questionnaire results, because you can see the average response and the range of responses for various answer choices. Box plots can also be used to assess the normality of multiple measures. In a perfectly normal distribution, the mean and median will be the same.
In a box plot, the size and location of the box indicate the range of values between the 25th and 75th percentile (interquartile range, IQR) for that group. The diamond marker indicates the mean value, and the line inside the box indicates the median value. You can also modify the options to display outliers in the plot. Outliers are data points whose distances from the interquartile range are more than 1.5 times the size of the interquartile range. Outliers can be located at the upper extreme or the lower extreme of the data range, or both. The whiskers (lines protruding from the box) can indicate either the minimum and maximum values or the range of values that are outside the interquartile range but close enough to not be considered outliers. If there are many outliers, the range of values is shown as a bar that is colored to represent the number of values within that range (as seen here).
The data tip for each box displays descriptive statistics for that group, like the minimum, maximum, lower whisker, upper whisker, first quartile, third quartile, average, median, standard deviation, and count. The data tip for each outlier bin displays additional information about the outliers, like the range of the bin and the frequency of observations falling within that bin.
Box plots require at least one measure, accept a category, and can use lattice columns and rows. Options are available for changing the direction of the boxes, modifying the measure layout (Automatic, Separate axes, Shared axis), and specifying how outliers are displayed. Outliers can be ignored (so they are excluded from the plot), shown (so they are shown separately from the whiskers), or hidden (so they are included within the whiskers). Additional options are available for drawing outlines around outlier bins to provide visual separation and to display averages as a diamond inside the box.
If your site has Visual Statistics and you have permissions for the /SASVisualAnalytics_capabilities/buildAnalyticalModel URI, then you can explore the data from the box plot as a new model by selecting a box, right-clicking it, selecting New object from selection, and choosing a model. A model is created that uses the category as the response and all other data items as predictors or effects.

=== Bubble Change Plots 126 ===
A bubble change plot is useful for showing the relative performance between three sets of measures from one point in time to another. Two sets of measures determine the placement of the bubbles on the axis and the third set of measures determines the sizes of the bubbles. It shows the changes in values using directed line segments (or vectors) between bubbles. The vectors show both the direction and magnitude of the change between the starting point and the ending point. Depending on your data structure, you might need to create calculated data items for the starting and ending measures. By default, the axes show X and Y, so you might want to hide the axis labels and use the title to describe the axes.
Bubble change plots require six measures: two for the starting point (X start) and ending point (X end) on the horizontal axis, two for the starting point (Y start) and ending point (Y end) on the vertical axis, and two for the starting size (Size start) and ending size (Size end) of the bubbles. In addition, vector plots can contain groups. Options are available for both sets of bubbles and the vector. For the bubbles, you can change the transparency of the bubbles and specify the size range for the bubbles. For the vector, you can change the transparency of the vectors, display or hide the arrowheads (to show direction), and specify the line thickness. In addition, you can choose to abbreviate numeric values in the legend.

=== Descriptive Charts 012 ===
Descriptive charts are useful for understanding the range and variability of the data. Descriptive charts are located in the Graphs group in the Objects pane and include box plots and histograms.

=== Donut Charts 142 ===
Donut charts are similar to pie charts but have a hole in the center that can display an abbreviated total. This hole makes it easier to compare relative sizes because it forces the viewer to focus on reading the lengths of the arcs rather than the proportions of the slices. A donut chart is the default style when adding a pie chart to the canvas, but you can modify options to display a pie chart instead. Like pie charts, donut charts cannot show a slice with a zero or negative response, so if your data has these values, another type of chart should be used.
Donut charts can contain groups, use lattice columns and lattice rows, display animation, and support the hidden data role. Options are available for changing the chart style (pie or donut), adding and modifying the donut hole label, the ring width, the starting point for the arcs, the direction in which the arcs are laid out (Counterclockwise or Clockwise), specifying if small values are grouped into an "Other" slice, modifying the grouping style when multiple measures or categories are assigned to the chart (Multiples or Stack), adding a measure label to the pie, and specifying what type and how data labels are displayed. For data labels, you can choose to show category labels, actual values, and percent of total values. In addition, you can specify the data label location (Auto, Callout, Inside, or Outside) and request abbreviated numeric values.
For pie charts and donut charts, avoid using the Stack grouping style, which displays the charts as a set of stacked rings. Stacked charts can be very difficult to interpret and tend to distort the data even further. In this case, a grouped bar chart or a multi-level treemap might be a better alternative.

=== Dual Axis Bar Charts 100 ===
Dual axis bar charts display two bar charts with a shared category axis and separate response axes. Use a dual axis bar chart when the categories are independent. That is, the current value for both measures does not depend on the prior value. For example, a dual axis bar chart could be used to show customer satisfaction and the number of sales representatives' customers by continent because the values for one continent are not impacted by the values for another.
NOTE: By default, a dual axis bar chart is sorted in descending order by the value of the first measure.
Dual axis bar charts can use lattice columns and rows, display animation, and support the hidden data role. Options are available for each group of bars and enable you to specify the baseline, change the transparency of the bars, add and modify data labels and segment labels, and abbreviate numeric values. In addition, options are available for both the left and right Y axes.

=== Dual Axis Bar-Line Charts 136 ===
Dual axis bar-line charts combine a bar chart and a line chart on a shared category axis. The bar chart and the line chart have separate response axes. For the bar, use an independent measure; that is, a measure whose current value does not depend on the prior value. For the line, use a dependent measure; that is, a measure whose current value does depend on the prior value. For example, a dual axis bar-line chart could be used to show temperature and rainfall by month. For this chart, the line would display temperatures because the temperature for February depends on the value from January. The bars would show rainfall because the rainfall for February does not depend on the value from January. By default, the axis for the bars starts at zero, but the axis for the line does not start at zero and will scale to a zoomed-in view.
NOTE: By default, a dual axis bar-line chart is sorted in descending order by the value of the first measure.
Dual axis bar-line charts can use lattice columns and rows, display animation, and support the hidden data role. Options are available for both the bars and the line. For the bars, you can specify the baseline, change the transparency of the bars, and add and modify data labels and segment labels. For the line, you can specify the baseline, change the transparency of the line, specify the grouping style (Overlay unfilled, Overlay filled, or Stack filled), specify the line thickness, add markers, and add and modify data labels. In addition, options are available to abbreviate numeric values and for both the left and right Y axes.

=== Dual Axis Charts 029 ===
When you want to compare two series with different ranges, dual axis charts can be very effective. Dual axis charts display each series on a separate axis, which makes it easy to see relationships between the series when the ranges are very different. Dual axis charts are located in the Graphs group in the Objects pane and include dual axis bar charts, dual axis bar-line charts, dual axis line charts, and dual axis time series plots.

=== Dual Axis Line Charts 107 ===
Dual axis line charts display data by using two lines that connect the data values for a shared category axis on separate response axes. Use a dual axis line chart when the categories are dependent. That is, the current value for both measures depends on the prior value. For example, a dual axis line chart could be used to show facility efficiency and number of employees by month because, for both measures, the values in February are impacted by the values from January. By default, the axes for the lines do not start at zero and will scale to a zoomed-in view.
Dual axis line charts can use lattice columns and rows, display animation, and support the hidden data role. Options are available for each line and enable you to specify the baseline, change the transparency of the line, specify the grouping style (Overlay unfilled, Overlay filled, or Stack filled), specify the line thickness, add markers, and add and modify data labels and segment labels. In addition, options are available for both the left and right Y axes.

=== Dual Axis Time Series Plots 121 ===
Dual axis time series plots display two time series with a common time axis on separate response axes. Dual axis time series plots are good for spotting seasonal movements for two sets of time series data. For example, a dual axis time series plot could be used to show unit actual and unit yield rates over time to show differences between production in the middle of the year versus production during the holidays. Forecasts are not added to the dual axis time series plot. To display a forecast, use the Forecasting object in the Analytics group.
Dual axis time series plots support the hidden data role. Options enable you to specify the binning interval (Automatic, Fixed count, and Use format). This enables you to specify whether the time axis interval is automatically determined (Automatic), uses a specific number of equally spaced values (Fixed count), or uses the format applied to the data item (Use format). Options are also available for each time series and enable you to specify the transparency of the line, specify the grouping style (Overlay unfilled, Overlay filled, or Stack filled), specify the line thickness, add markers, add and modify data labels and abbreviate numeric values. In addition, options are available for both the left and right Y axes.

=== Histograms 121 ===
Histograms can be used to view the distribution of a single measure. A histogram consists of a series of bars where the height represents the number of observations that fit in a specific range. Histograms are ideal for gauging the overall range of a measure and for identifying values that contain a high number of observations. Histograms can also be used to determine whether a measure is normally distributed, which can be very helpful in modeling. In fact, data distribution is key to determining the appropriate transformations and the best modeling algorithm to use. In this example, the histogram for Product Quality shows that the data is skewed to the left, indicating that a log transformation might be helpful.
Histograms require a measure and a frequency value (which can be Frequency or Frequency Percent). Options are available for changing the direction of the bars, modifying the transparency, and specifying how the boundaries of the bin ranges are determined. Bin ranges can be determined by the system (which might extend the bin ranges beyond the minimum and maximum values in the data) or can be set using measure values (which places the boundaries using the actual minimum and maximum values in the data). If the bin ranges are determined using measure values, you can set a fixed bin count and specify a fixed number of bins that will be displayed in the histogram.

=== Lesson Overview 047 ===
In this lesson, you learn about additional objects you can add to your toolbelt. Descriptive charts are useful for understanding the range and variability of the data and include box plots and histograms. Part-to-whole charts are useful for describing how parts relate to the whole and include pie charts, donut charts, treemaps, and word clouds. Dual axis charts are useful for comparing two series with different ranges and include dual axis bar charts, dual axis bar-line charts, dual axis line charts, and dual axis time series plots. Lastly, you will learn about time-variant charts. These are useful for showing changes over time and include step plots, vector plots, bubble change plots, waterfall charts, and schedule charts.

=== Part-to-Whole Charts 015 ===
Part-to-whole charts are useful for showcasing the relative contribution of each part to the whole. Part-to-whole charts are located in the Graphs group in the Objects pane and include pie charts, donut charts, treemaps, and word clouds.

=== Pie Charts 248 ===
A pie chart is best used to compare a few groups (five or less) whose values vary greatly. These charts display the relative contribution of each group to the whole using a circle that is divided into multiple slices. Pie charts are popular, but be aware that it is very hard to compare the relative sizes of slices in the chart. In addition, changes over time are difficult to detect, and pie charts take up more space than any other types of charts (like bar charts and treemaps). Because of this, pie charts should be used sparingly and only in special circumstances. Specifically, you can use a pie chart to illustrate that one value makes up the majority (as seen in this pie chart), which might be difficult to detect in a bar chart.
NOTE: By default, pie charts are sorted in descending order by the contribution of the measure. If the pie chart contains a lattice, then the slices are sorted in ascending order by the category.
Pie charts can contain groups, use lattice columns and lattice rows, display animation, and support the hidden data role. Options are available for changing the chart style (pie or donut), the starting point for the slices, the direction in which the slices are laid out (Counterclockwise or Clockwise), specifying if small values are grouped into an "Other" slice, for which you can set a minimum percentage, modifying the grouping style when multiple measures or categories are assigned to the chart (Multiples or Stack), adding a measure label to the pie, and specifying what type and how data labels are displayed. For data labels, you can choose to show category labels, actual values, and percent of total values. In addition, you can specify the data label location (Auto, Callout, Inside, or Outside) and ask to abbreviate numeric values.
If your pie chart displays more than five slices, specify a minimum percentage for "Other" slice to limit the number of slices. Avoid using ranks to limit the number of pie slices. This defeats the purpose of using a pie chart to display a part-to-whole relationship. In addition, be aware that pie charts cannot show a slice with a zero or negative response, so if your data has these values, another type of chart should be used.
NOTE: The Other slice does not display data tip values. In addition, the Other slice always sums the included values, regardless of the aggregation method selected for the measure. For example, if the aggregation method selected is Count, then the Other slice displays the sum of the individual counts.
For pie charts and donut charts, avoid using the Stack grouping style, which displays the charts as a set of stacked rings. Stacked charts can be very difficult to interpret and tend to distort the data even further. In this case, a grouped bar chart or a multi-level treemap might be a better alternative.

=== Schedule Charts 056 ===
A schedule chart, also known as a Gantt chart, is useful for project management as it provides a detailed overview of required tasks, the duration of each task, and the order in which they need to be completed. A schedule chart uses bars to indicate the start and end times of an event to enable you to visualize a project plan. Schedule charts can be useful for showing calendar events (like company holidays or vacations), for tracking the status of projects, for highlighting important dates in campaign or promotional runs, or for arranging employee work schedules for floor service coverage.
Schedule charts require a task, a start value, and a finish value. In addition, schedule charts can contain groups, display labels for each bar, use lattice columns and rows, and support the hidden data role. Options are available for changing the transparency of the bars and modifying abbreviating numeric values for data labels.

=== Step Plots 054 ===
The step plot is useful for showing changes that occur at irregular, discrete intervals. For example, step plots are often used to show the changes in interest rates over time. This is because interest rates have a set value for a given period and jump up (or down) to a new rate at irregular dates. A step plot displays a series of horizontal and vertical line segments (which give the appearance of steps) that enables you to quickly spot the exact point on the X axis when a change in the Y axis occurs. When using a step plot, typically, the X axis displays dates or times.
Step plots can contain groups, display labels for each line segment, use lattice columns and rows, and support the hidden data role. Options are available for changing the transparency of the line, specifying the line thickness, adding markers, and abbreviating numeric values for data labels.

=== Time Variant Charts 016 ===
Time variant charts are useful for showing changes over time. Time variant charts are located in the Graphs group in the Objects pane and include step plots, vector plots, bubble change plots, waterfall charts, and schedule charts.

=== Treemaps 109 ===
Treemaps, sometimes called tile charts, can be used to display lots of information in a small amount of space. A category or hierarchy can be used to create the tiles, and measures can be added to both size and color the tiles. Typically, the size and color are used to draw attention to areas of interest (for example, top contributors). The measures should mean something when they are compared, but they should not be the same. Treemaps are a better alternative to pie charts and donut charts to show part-to-whole relationships. This is because the treemap circumvents the problem of reading angles and provides more space for labeling. In addition, treemaps can also be used to display multi-level data, like the levels of a hierarchy.
Treemaps support the hidden data role. Options are available for arranging the layout of the tiles (Flow, Standard, or Toggle), for displaying the category level, for adding and modifying data labels, and abbreviating numeric values in the legend. A space-filling algorithm is used to lay out tiles on the treemap. This means that the same treemap might appear slightly different depending on the screen size.

=== Using Dual Axis Charts 034 ===
In general, dual axis charts can be useful when you want to display two measures with the same unit of measurement and different scales (like number of orders and the number of customers)
or when you need to display two measures with different units of measurement (like total sales and efficiency rates).
When using dual axis charts, use the left Y axis to show the primary measure and the right Y axis for the secondary measure.
To make dual axis charts easier to interpret, you can color-coordinate the axes labels and tick values with the color of the bars or lines.

=== Vector Plots 108 ===
A vector plot is useful for showing the relative performance between two sets of measures from one point in time to another. It shows the changes in values by using directed line segments (or vectors). The vectors show both the direction and magnitude of the change between the starting point and the ending point. Depending on your data structure, you might need to create calculated data items for the starting and ending measures. By default, the axes show the name of the ending value, so you might want to hide the axis labels and use the title to describe the axes.
Vector plots require four measures: two for the starting point (X Origin) and ending point (X axis) for the horizontal axis and two for the starting point (Y Origin) and ending point (Y axis) of the vertical axis. In addition, vector plots can use color to display the lines, can contain groups, use lattice columns and rows, and support the hidden data role. Options are available for changing the transparency of the vectors, displaying or hiding the arrowheads (to show direction), and specifying the line thickness.

=== Waterfall Charts 143 ===
A waterfall chart, sometimes called a progressive bar chart, is useful for showing how incremental changes lead to a final value. It shows how the initial value of a measure increases or decreases for a categorical value. The first bar begins at the initial value, and each subsequent bar begins where the previous bar ends. The length and direction of the bar indicate the magnitude and type (positive or negative). Typically, waterfall charts display the cumulative effects of sequential values (like dates), but they can show the total for any categorical data item. In this example, the waterfall chart shows the change in total orders from the same month in the previous year. The final value shows the change in total orders for the current year versus the previous year.
NOTE: Waterfall charts are known by many names: progressive bar charts, flying bricks charts, Mario charts, and bridges (in finance).
Waterfall charts can use lattice columns and rows and support the hidden data role. Options are available for specifying a baseline, displaying a trend line to connect each of the bars, modifying the spacing and transparency of the bars, and adding and modifying an initial bar and final (cumulative) bar. For the initial bar, you can specify an initial value and a label and for the final (cumulative) bar, you can specify a label. In addition, options are available for specifying that the bars are colored by the direction of the change (by default, red for decreasing, and green for increasing), adding and modifying data labels, and abbreviating numeric values.
You can change the color of the initial bar, final bar, and increase and decrease bars in the Style group.

=== Word Clouds 157 ===
Word clouds, sometimes called tag clouds, can be used to visually represent text data in a cloud-like shape. A word cloud analyzes each value of a category data item as a single text string. The value of one measure can be used to size the word, and the value of another measure can be used to color the word.
Word clouds should be avoided if analytical accuracy is desired because the size and position of the word can impact the attention placed on the word.
Words that have more letters often seem larger than words that have fewer letters. In addition, words that contain large letters (like o, m, and w) generally receive more attention than words that contain smaller letters (like l, i, and f). Lastly, words whose letters contain ascenders (the part of a lowercase letter that projects above the body of the letter: b, d, or h) or descenders (the part of a lowercase letter that projects below the body of the letter: g, p, or q) receive more attention than words that do not.
In addition, words in the middle of the word cloud attract more attention than those near the borders, and in Western cultures, words in the upper left quadrant receive more attention.
Word clouds also are not desired when viewers are searching for a specific word, as it can be difficult to locate one word out of many.
To avoid text length bias, use two- or three-letter abbreviations in the word cloud rather than full names.
NOTE: For more information about the usability studies for word clouds, see https:en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tag_cloud.
Word clouds support the hidden data role. Options are available for arranging the layout of the words (Cloud or Rows), for specifying the difference in font sizes between the largest and smallest words, for specifying the maximum number of words displayed in the word cloud, and abbreviating numeric values in the legend.

