=== Course Overview 155 ===
In this course, we assume the role of users who work for various types of companies. Each company has its own unique problems that need to be addressed and solved with SAS Visual Analytics. Solving these business problems involves working with analytic objects, creating data for advanced reports, working with display rules and learning how to share and manage reports. Many different types of data will be used to showcase the features and functionality of Visual Analytics.
For a more detailed description of each data source used in this course, see the Data Descriptions resource in this course.
In this course, we continue to build on the concepts you mastered in SAS Visual Analytics 1 for SAS Viya: Basics. In Lesson 1, we learn about using relationship plots, how to quickly gain insights from your data using the automated explanation and automated prediction objects, layout your report using containers and create reusable object templates. In Lesson 2 we introduce the graph builder which allows you to build your own custom graph templates that can be used in your Visual Analytics reports. In Lesson 3, we dive into the available analytic objects in SAS Visual Analytics by providing the necessary data structure requirements and covering options to customize the results
In Lesson 4, we will dive deeper into creating data for advanced reports. We will describe how to create a new data source via data joins and aggregate data, how to create advanced calculated items and aggregated measures. In Lesson 5, we will dive further into building advanced reports by adding parameters, display rules and links to allow the report viewer greater interactivity. In lesson 6, we discuss best practices for designing reports. It's a good idea to follow these simple guidelines so you can create reports that are both visually compelling and operationally effective. Lastly, in Lesson 7 we will learn how you can share and manage Visual Analytics reports.

=== Welcome to the Course 106 ===
Welcome to SAS Visual Analytics 2 for SAS Viya: Advanced. I'm Teri Patsilaras.I'm Greg Treiman. And I'm Nithin Ramu. SAS Visual Analytics uses the power of Cloud Analytic Services (CAS) to perform advanced analytic computations on your data at impressive speeds. In this course, we'll help give you the skills you need to perform advanced analyses in a fraction of the time it would take using traditional programming methods. You'll learn to take your SAS Visual Analytics reports to the next level by adding advanced analytic objects and creating new data types. You'll also learn how to use parameters to further customize your reports and how to design new graph objects using SAS Graph Builder.We'll finish off by showing you some best practices for sharing your reports with other users. After this course, you'll be able to take advantage of SAS Visual Analytics powerful capabilities to create your own custom dashboards. The only limit is your imagination! Let's get started!

=== Automated Explanation 307 ===
The automated explanation object determines the most important underlying factors that explain a particular variable. You must specify a response variable to explain.
The automated explanation object does several things. Once you provide it a response data item, it displays summary and characteristic information about the response factor, such as the range, and information about outliers. It also displays a bar chart, which shows the relative importance of the underlying factors in descending order of importance. Finally, it displays a relationship plot, representing the relationship between the response variable and a selected underlying factor. The type of plot depends on the variable type of both the underlying factor and the response variable.
The automated explanation object has three roles: Response, Time, and Underlying factors. When you assign a data item to the Response variable, most of the remaining data items are automatically added as underlying factors. However, aggregated measures, date and time values, and automatically computed values such as frequency, hierarchies, filter items, interaction effects, and spline effects are not added as underlying factors. SAS Visual Analytics also screens the remaining data items and rejects any that don't meet certain criteria, such as being identical to another variable, being a subset of the response data, having extremely high cardinality, or having a large number of missing values.
The relative importance bar chart displays all of the data items assigned to the Underlying factors roles, in descending order of importance to the Response data item. The most important factor is assigned a value of 1, and all the other scores are proportional to that. You can remove any individual underlying factor from the right-click context menu. A filter action is defined, so that clicking on a bar in the bar chart will update the relationship plot.
The type of relationship plot depends on the variable type of both the response variable and the selected underlying factor. If the both the underlying factor and the response variable are measures, then the relationship plot is either a scatter plot or a heat map. If the response variable is a measure and the underlying factor is a category, a bar chart is displayed. If the response is a measure and the underlying factor is a geography data item, then either a geo region or a geo coordinate map is displayed. If the response is a category and the underlying factor is a measure, then a histogram grouped by event level of interest is displayed. If both are categories, then a stacked bar chart grouped by event level of interest is displayed.
You can also optionally display a fourth object by turning on the High and low groups option in the Options pane. Doing so will display a High tab and a Low tab, where the three groups of the selected underlying factor resulting in both the highest and lowest average response values are displayed. For example, here the High tab displays the three groups of Retail Price values resulting in the highest values of Profit.

=== Automated Prediction 304 ===
The automated prediction object allows you to predict values of a selected response variable by specifying values for the underlying factors. The object runs several models and then chooses a champion model to use in the prediction.
The automated prediction object displays three components: the underlying values input form, the predicted response value, and a text description of the predicted value and model used.
The Automated Prediction object has two roles: Response and Underlying factors. The Response variable can be a category or measure data item that you want to predict. It cannot be a partition item or a calculated item that uses a parameter in the calculation. After a response variable is assigned, the other variables are assigned to the Underlying factors role. Aggregated measures, date and time values, calculated items, custom categories, derived items, and automatically computed values such as frequency, hierarchies, filter items, partition items, interaction effects, and spline effects are not added as underlying factors. Additional variables are rejected during the variable screening process, such as those with excessive missing values, high correlation with the response, or high cardinality.
Once you have specified a response variable to predict, the automated prediction object runs several models and chooses a champion model that best explains the response variable. The type of models tested depends on whether the response variable is a category or a measure. For a category response, the object compares: logistic regression (binary response only), gradient boosting, and decision tree. The champion model is based on the highest accuracy of 100 minus the misclassification rate. For a measure response, the candidate models that are run are: linear regression, gradient boosting, and decision tree. The champion model is based on the lowest average squared error (ASE). Additional information about the model selection is available by maximizing the automated prediction object.
Once a model has been selected, it will identify the most important underlying factors in the values input form. By default, it displays the most common or median values for all underlying factors and the resulting predicted response value. You can then enter or select new values using the form and see how the predicted response value changes. Each time you update an input value, the model automatically runs and displays an updated prediction.
There are a few things that you should keep in mind when you're using the automated prediction object. They are excluded from all report and page prompts, and you can't use them as the source or target of actions. Additionally, while SAS Visual Analytics will run several models each time you select new underlying values, you can't select a model yourself. For more control over the model selection process, you can instead use SAS Visual Statistics.

=== Bubble Plots 208 ===
Bubble plots are useful for displaying three dimensions of data for some group of category values. A bubble plot compares at least three measures by using markers (bubbles) of varying sizes in a scatter plot. The values of two measures determine the location of the bubble in the plot, and the value of the third measure determines the size of the bubble. A bubble's size is scaled relative to the minimum and maximum values of the size variable. The minimum and maximum values are displayed in the legend.
By default, bubble plots display non-aggregated data. This means that a bubble plot will attempt to display one bubble for every row in the data source. If you use a large table or use data items with high cardinality, a message appears that no data is displayed because too many values were returned from the query. You can assign a category to the Group role or create a filter to reduce the data. As a best practice, if you are using big data, assign a category to the Group role before assigning the measures to avoid this message.
Bubble plots can also be animated to show changes in data over time. When a data item is assigned to the Animation role, a player is added to the graph, which you can use to play and pause the animation, step through the date intervals, change the animation speed and loop the animation. In addition, options are available to format the animation date or time value that is displayed in the chart. For animated bubble plots, you want to focus on bubbles that act differently than others (for example, bubbles that are stationary while others are moving or bubbles that are moving in a different direction from the rest of the group).
Bubble plots require three measures: X axis (for the horizontal location), Y axis (for the vertical location) and size (for the bubble size). Additionally, bubble plots can contain groups, accept the color role, use lattice columns and rows, specify data tip values, display animation, and support the hidden data role. Options are available for changing the transparency of the bubbles and specifying the size range for the bubbles in the plot.

=== Containers 037 ===
Containers are useful for grouping report objects. Containers are located in the Containers group on the Objects pane and include prompt containers, standard containers, stacking containers, scrolling containers, and precision containers.
Containers help make your reports more consistent (by enabling you to style objects at the container level and size objects within each container), more manageable (by enabling you to copy objects and create object templates at the container level), and more versatile (by enabling you to create a wide variety of report designs that can be used for different scenarios).

=== Correlation Matrices 254 ===
A correlation matrix can be used to evaluate the linear relationship between multiple measures. It displays the degree of correlation as a matrix of rectangular cells. Each cell represents the intersection of two measures, and the color of the cell indicates the degree of correlation between those measures. Lighter colors represent weaker correlation (near zero) while darker colors represent stronger correlation (near 1 or -1).
The correlation values are calculated by using Pearson's correlation coefficient. They are identified as weak (if the absolute value of the correlation is 0.3 or lower), moderate (if the absolute value of the correlation is greater than 0.3 and less than or equal to 0.6), or strong (if the absolute value of the correlation is greater than 0.6). Positive correlation values indicate that as one measure increases, so does the other, whereas negative correlation values indicate that as one measure increases, the other decreases.
You can see the calculated correlation value by hovering over a cell and viewing the data tip or by maximizing the chart and viewing the Details table.
If you would like to examine the relationship between two variables more closely, you can select the cell in the correlation matrix, right-click the cell and select New object from selection. This will enable you to create a heat map of the variables or a model (if your site has Visual Statistics available). Alternatively, you can select a whole column and create a new model using those variables.
Although two measures seem to have a weak relationship, this does not mean that they have no relationship. Remember that the correlation measures the linear relationship between measures. The actual relationship could be more complex or there could be insufficient data to show the relationship. Nonlinear relationships can best be displayed with either a scatter plot or a heat map.
Correlation matrices require measures. You can specify to show correlations within one set of measures or between two sets of measures.
If you display correlations within one set of measures (the default), all measures are compared to all other measures. In this case, the first variable you select will be displayed at the bottom left of the graph. If you have a target variable, it's recommended to select it first. If you display correlations between two sets of measures each set of measures is compared only to the other set of measures, not to other measures within that set. For example, in this correlation matrix, the measures on the Y axis (Product Quality and Product Price target) are only compared to the measures on the X axis (Product Sale, Product Cost of Sale, and Product Material Cost) and are not compared to each other.
Options are available for adding a border around each cell and rotating the axis labels so the entire measure name is displayed.

=== Fit Lines 238 ===
Fit lines can be added to scatter plots and heat maps of measures to plot the relationship between variables. When adding a fit line, you can select the type of relationship to plot: linear, quadratic, cubic, best fit, or PSpline.
To add a fit line, right-click the chart, select Fit line, and choose the type or use the Options pane to specify the type of fit line.
A linear relationship is plotted as a straight line that represents the relationship between the measures. For this method, correlation information is automatically added to the plot.
A quadratic relationship is plotted as a line with a single curve that represents the relationship between the measures. This method produces a line with the shape of a parabola, containing a single inflection point.
A cubic relationship is plotted as a line with two curves that represents the relationship between the measures. This method often produces a line with an S shape, containing two inflection points.
Best fit selects the most appropriate model (linear, quadratic, or cubic) for your data. This method uses backward variable selection to select the highest-order model that is significant. No penalty is assigned for complexity, so best fit often selects more complex models (like cubic and quadratic) over simpler models (like linear). Be cautious of overfitting. In most cases, the linear fit line is appropriate.
A P-spline relationship creates a penalized B-spline, which is a smoothing spline that closely fits the data. A spline is a function defined by piecewise polynomials. This method can display a complex line with many changes in its curvature.
Once a fit line has been added, you can view more information about the model by maximizing the object and viewing the details table. The Analysis tab displays information like the model type and description, the R-squared value, correlation information and the slope (for linear fit lines), the function of the fit line, the average x and y values, the standard deviation for the x and y values, and the number of observations.
For best fit, you can view this table to determine which model was chosen. Recall that best fit uses backward variable selection to choose the appropriate model. In this example, the cubic model was chosen, but viewing the function shows that the coefficients for the x-squared and x-cubed terms are very small. A linear fit line might be the best choice.
For PSpline, only the model type and description, the R-square value, and the error sum of squares are displayed.

=== Heat Maps 113 ===
Heat maps can be used to evaluate the relationship between two high-cardinality measures, between two categories, or between a category and a measure. A heat map displays the distribution of values for two data items by using a table with colored cells. Heat maps are especially useful to visualize trends between measures, to pinpoint possible outliers, and to identify nonlinear relationships.
Heat maps require Axis Items. You can assign two data items to display a single heat map or assign multiple data items to display a matrix of heat maps.
The matrix displays each possible paring of axis items that are assigned.
Additionally, heat maps accept the color role. Options are available for specifying the number of bins displayed, adding borders between cells, changing the transparency of the cells, and adding a fit line to the graph. The Bin count option only affects measures, and the Fit Line option is only available if at least two measures are assigned to the chart. For Fit lines, you can specify the type (None, Best fit, Linear, Quadratic, Cubic, or PSpline) and change the transparency of the line.

=== Lesson Overview 049 ===
In this lesson, you learn about additional objects you can add to your toolbelt. Relationship plots are useful for viewing relationships between measures and include bubble plots, correlation matrices, heat maps, numeric series plots, parallel coordinate plots, and scatter plots. The automated explanation builds a series of easily interpretable visualizations and text that explain how variables are related to a response variable. The automated prediction allows you to predict the value of a response variable by entering values of underlying factors using a machine learning model that it automatically creates. Container objects are useful for grouping report objects to make the most of the space on a report. And Object templates allow you to save your preferred options with an object.

=== Numeric Series Plots 101 ===
Numeric series plots can be used to show a measure value at various intervals after some event. For example, you can create a chart that shows the unemployment rate one month, two months, three months, and so on after a recession begins. In this example, we can see that most recessions follow a similar trend; unemployment rates increase steadily during the recession. The exception is the 2020 Recession, which was caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. In that recession, there was a small decrease in unemployment followed by a large spike due to the shutdown requirements.
Numeric series plots require two measures: X axis and Y axis. Additionally, numeric series plots can contain groups, accept the label role, use lattice columns and rows, specify data tip values, and support the hidden data role. Options are available for changing the transparency of the lines, specifying the line thickness, adding markers, abbreviating numeric values and displaying data labels.

=== Object Templates 443 ===
In Visual Analytics, all objects have default options set, which can be modified according to your report requirements. You might find yourself modifying the same options each time. For example, for bar charts, you might remove grid lines, change the direction to vertical, change the grouping style to stacked, and remove X axis labels. Instead of modifying the same options repeatedly, you can create an object template with your customizations. This ensures that your tables, graphs, and controls will have a similar appearance in multiple reports.
To work with object templates, follow these steps: (1) modify options to meet your requirements, (2) save the object to the Objects pane with your modifications, (3) give the object template a meaningful name, and (4) use the object template in your reports.
First, you modify options to customize the object as desired. You can modify general options (like object options, style options, and layout options), object-specific options, axis options (like axis label and tick values), graph options (like graph frame, reference lines, legend, and data options) or table options (like cells, cell visualizations, totals, and subtotals).
You can even save containers that include other objects, which can be useful for preserving the layout of objects and can help speed up development time. For containers, start by adding the container to the canvas. Then, add objects to the container and configure their layout. Next, modify the options for each object using the Options pane.
Next, save the object to the Objects pane. You can save the object by right-clicking the object and selecting Save to Objects pane, by selecting Save to Objects pane from the object toolbar, or by right-clicking the object in the Outline pane and selecting Save to Objects pane. For containers, use the Outline pane to save the container as an object template.
When you save the object, you can choose whether to save the object with or without data. If you include data, all data-related items (like role assignments, display rules, filters, ranks, and sorting) are saved with the object. This would be useful if you want to preserve these data assignments for use in another page or another report.
By default, object templates are available only to users who create them. However, application administrators have the option to publish the object template, making it available to all users. This enables users to create reports using objects with the same customizations.
After the object template has been saved, it's added to the Objects pane with a default name. Objects saved without data are added to the same group as the original object. For example, an object template for a bar chart will be added to the Graphs group. Objects saved with data are added to a new group, Objects with Data. You can edit the properties of the new object to give it a more meaningful name. Be aware that objects in the Objects pane are sorted alphabetically by default. You can name all object templates beginning with a space and a common prefix to more easily locate your customized objects. The space will ensure that your customized objects are displayed first in each group.
Users can change only the name of object templates they have created. Application administrators can change the name of any objects they have created and any published object templates.
Lastly, you will use the object template in your reports just like regular objects, by adding it to the canvas, assigning data, and adding any actions, filters, or ranks required for your scenario. When the object template is used in a report, it behaves just like any other object.
When creating object templates, there are some things to consider. You cannot save an object template for containers that contain custom graphs or model comparison objects. You cannot edit an object template. If you want to make changes, you can modify options for the object and create a new object template from those changes. The Duplicate as and Change object to options cannot be used to change objects to an object template. Deleting an object template will not delete any objects or reports that use the object template; it just deletes the object template from the Objects pane.
You can delete only object templates you have created. Application administrators, on the other hand, can delete their own object templates and any published object templates. If you do not want to see the object templates in your Objects pane, you can always hide them, just like any other object. It's a best practice to delete the object templates that are no longer in use.

=== Parallel Coordinates Plots 111 ===
Parallel coordinates plots are useful for analyzing multivariate data to understand interactions and correlations between data, for understanding features that contribute to specific outcomes, and for revealing clusters within the data. The plot displays data as lines moving through categories and binned measures. The thickness of each line indicates the relative number of observations in that bin.
You can select one or more bins to focus on the data of interest. In addition, you can right-click the object and select Reverse axes to reverse one or more of the ranges. This is useful for comparing variables that are inversely related.
You can also maximize the chart to see a details table that lists values of each variable for each polyline in the chart.
Parallel coordinates plots require at least two variables. These can be any combination of categories, dates, or measures. As a best practice, add your target variable first; this data item will be displayed in the first bin. Options are available for specifying the number of bins for each measure assigned to the plot and for limiting the maximum number of polylines generated by the algorithm.

=== Precision Container 227 ===
The precision container enables you to create a report with overlapping objects. You can control the placement, alignment, depth, and size of all objects within the container.
For each object in the container, the placement and size of the object can be controlled by specifying layout options: Left and Top determine the placement of the object from the top, left corner of the container and Width and Height determine the size of the object. These values are specified as percentages, not the pixel size, so they will adjust when the screen resolution changes. It's a best practice to use whole numbers for the layout options.
The alignment of the objects can be controlled by using the alignment guides that appear when you move objects within the container. You can also align objects by selecting two or more objects and using the Align icon from the report toolbar. This enables you to align the objects both horizontally (Align left, Align center, and Align right) and vertically (Align top, Align middle, and Align bottom).
The depth of the objects can be controlled by right-clicking the object and selecting Send to back or Send to front.
Because precision containers allow layering of objects, they are often used to add an image background to the report. Most objects are transparent, so the background image is visible. When adding a background image, be sure to adjust the text and fill colors of your charts so they appear with sufficient contrast and are easy to see. Be aware, that precision containers can cause problems when reports are viewed on different screen sizes. When you use them, it's recommended to set the report-level option Set fixed report size to specify a fixed size of the report. If you use this option, however, be sure to test thoroughly on all screen sizes.
You can modify the layout of the precision container by specifying the container type (flow, stacking, or precision).
When working with containers, it can often be difficult to move objects into and out of the container and to modify options for the container. You can use the Outline pane to organize objects in the container, to move objects into and out of a container, and to select the container on the page. In addition, you can use the drop-down control at the top of the Options pane to modify options for the container. You can also save containers that include objects as an object template. This is useful for preserving the layout of objects and can help speed up development time.

=== Prompt Container 154 ===
The prompt container can be used to organize multiple prompts and can be beneficial to mobile device users by enabling easier navigation. The prompt container enables you to group control objects together in a collapsible container, which will reduce the amount of space that control objects use in the report. The prompt container, unlike the other container types, can be used anywhere in the report: the report prompt area, the page prompt area, and the canvas. In addition, the prompt container enables you to add a list control to the report and page prompt areas when they are displayed above or below the canvas.
When the prompt container is used in the page or report prompt areas, you can define actions between controls. When the prompt container is used on the canvas, you can define actions between the control objects in a prompt container and other objects in the canvas. You cannot define an action to the prompt container itself. The prompt container is just a vessel for holding the controls.
You can modify the layout of the prompt container by specifying the direction of placement of controls in the container (vertical or horizontal), and by specifying the width and height of the container. To ensure compatibility with all screen sizes, you can specify that the prompt container's height or width should be extended if space is available. Conversely, you can indicate that the container height or width should shrink if there is not enough space. Other options are available for automatically applying values selected in the controls. If this option is not selected, selections are not applied to the report until you close the container to apply the changes. You may want to deselect this option to improve the speed of your report. This will apply all selections at once. In addition, options are available for specifying the label and styling of the button text, and for selecting a background color for the button and the button control bar.

=== Relationship Plots 019 ===
Relationship plots are useful for viewing relationships between measures. Relationship plots are located in the Graphs group in the Objects pane and include bubble plots, correlation matrices, heat maps, numeric series plots, parallel coordinates plots, and scatter plots.

=== Scatter Plots 149 ===
Scatter plots can be used to evaluate the relationship between two low-cardinality measures by displaying the values of both measures using markers. Each marker in the plot represents a single observation and the position of the marker indicates the value for each observation. Scatter plots are especially useful to visualize trends between measures, to pinpoint possible outliers, and to identify nonlinear relationships. Traditionally, the independent variable is displayed on the horizontal (x) axis and the dependent variable is displayed on the vertical (y) axis.
Scatter plots display detail data. This means that a scatter plot will attempt to display one marker for every row in the data source. If you use a large table or use data items with high cardinality, a message appears that no data is displayed because too many values were returned from the query. You can create a filter to reduce the data.
Scatter plots require Measures. You can assign two measures to display a single scatter plot or assign multiple measures to display a matrix of scatter plots.
The matrix displays each possible paring of measures that are assigned.
Additionally, scatter plots accept the color role, use lattice columns and rows, specify data tip values, display data labels, and support the hidden data role. Options are available for changing the transparency, shape, size, and fill of the markers. Additional options are available for displaying data labels, hiding data labels to minimize overlapping text and abbreviating numeric values. You can also add a fit line to the graph. For Fit lines, you can specify the type (None, Best fit, Linear, Quadratic, Cubic, or PSpline) and change the transparency of the line.

=== Scrolling Container 113 ===
The scrolling container enables you to create a report that functions like a web page. You can add more information, graphs can be larger, and the viewing experience can be improved for a mobile device or tablet. Each object fills the entire container area, and you must scroll to see other objects. This layout enables more clarification of objects because it enables you to add text to describe the object or text that includes additional information. It can, however, be tricky to design the report, as the sizing of objects will differ based on the screen resolution and the device. When using this container, it's a best practice to test the report thoroughly on all devices to ensure the report looks as intended.
You can modify the layout of the scrolling container by specifying the container type (flow, stacking, or precision). For the flow container type, you can also specify the direction of the flow (horizontal or vertical) and whether scrollbars should be avoided. For a scrolling container, Avoid scrollbars is not selected by default. When using a scrolling container, it's a best practice to specify the direction of the flow as vertical. This makes it easier for viewers to view the content on a computer.

=== Sharing Object Templates 339 ===
In some instances, you might need to share object templates with other SAS Viya environments. If you have separate environments for development, testing, and production, you might create the object templates in one environment and want to use those templates in another environment without having to re-create them. Alternatively, if you have opened a track with Tech Support, you might be asked to share the object templates for debugging purposes.
An application administrator can use the Export feature in SAS Environment Manager to export a JSON file that contains details about the object template, like the URI (uniform resource identifier), folder location, and details about the object template.
To share object templates, you need to follow three steps: (1) locate the object templates in SAS Content, (2) export the object template, and (3) import the object template in the new environment.
Object templates are stored on the SAS Infrastructure Data Server and are stored in the SAS Content/Products/SAS Visual Analytics/Resources folder.
Then, from SAS Environment Manager, you can use the Content page to navigate to the folder and export the object template, by right-clicking the resource and selecting Export or by selecting the object and clicking the Export button. Using this method, you can export each object template individually.
Alternatively, you can export all object templates by exporting the Resources folder. The Resources folder will include all object templates and data views in the current environment. Typically, if you are promoting content (by exporting from development to test to production), you will want to export all resources. This takes less time and is easier to maintain.
Instead, you can use the transfer plug-in to the Command Line Interface (CLI). The CLI enables you to interact directly with SAS Viya platform REST services and can be used to work with the platform programmatically. The CLI contains many plug-ins that can be used to manage authorization, users, services, licenses, and SAS Viya content (like folders, models, reports, or resources). The transfer plug-in has an export command that generates JSON files for SAS content.
To export an object template, use the transfer export command seen here.
The object-template-ID can be found on the Content page of SAS Environment Manager by navigating to the object template and viewing the URI (/reportTemplates/objects/object-template-ID). The json-file-name specifies the name of the JSON file that is created.
After the JSON file is created, you can use the Content page in SAS Environment Manager to import the object template (or all resources). Click the Import button at the top of the Content page or use the Import page in SAS Environment Manager. Because the folder structure is included in the JSON file, you can import from the top level of the Content page.
Importing content uses a wizard where you select the resources to import, map content and tables, preview the content items, and view the results. When the import is complete, your object templates will be available in the target environment.
Alternatively, you can use the transfer plug-in to the Command Line Interface (CLI). The transfer plug-in has an import command that imports JSON files to SAS Content. To import an object template, use the transfer import command seen here.
The json-file-id is provided when you upload the JSON file to the target environment.

=== Stacking Container 122 ===
The stacking container can be used to group related objects, can be used to pick your metric, or can add an alternative way to view the same information in different ways (like by including a table or a more mainstream chart of the same information). Objects in the stacking container are displayed as if they are in a slide deck with one object displayed at a time. The stacking container is one of the easiest containers to add to your reports as it takes the same space as any object and can be easily navigated by your viewers.
A navigation bar is provided to enable users to flip through the various objects. The navigation bar labels come from the names assigned to each object. However, be aware that for the stacking container, you cannot format the font color, size, or style of the navigation bar. You can, however, modify the background color of the container to style the navigation pane. Just be sure to choose a background color that works well with black text.
You can modify the layout of the stacking container by specifying the container type (flow, stacking, or precision). For the stacking container type, you can also specify the button type for the navigation bar (buttons, dots, links, tabs, or numbers) and the placement of the buttons and the navigation bar.
These options enable you to customize the navigation bar. Here you can see all options for the button type and different options for the placement of the navigation bar.

=== Standard Container 113 ===
The standard container can be used to arrange objects horizontally or vertically without overlap. This container uses the default grid layout and resizes content to fit within the container with no scrollbars. You can nest several standard containers to quickly create columns, then modify the background color of each container to separate the columns. Be aware that when using this container, you can inadvertently create extra whitespace if the Expand width if available and Expand height if available options are not enabled on each object in the container.
You can modify the layout of the standard container by specifying the container type (flow, stacking, or precision). For the flow container type, you can also specify the direction of the flow (horizontal or vertical) and whether scrollbars should be avoided. For a standard container, Avoid scrollbars is selected by default and Resize content to fit container is selected. This means that each object will be resized to fit inside the container area. Alternatively, you can select Resize container to fit content, which will resize the container to fit the objects inside the container. Depending on the size of the objects in the container, this option might add scrollbars.

=== Adding Scope to an Aggregated Measure 304 ===
Let's discuss another feature of aggregated measures: the ability to add scope. A scoped aggregated measure calculation is an expression defined for an intersection of categories. In other words, you can define different expressions for different intersections, or data crossings, allowing certain cells of a crosstab or other object to be calculated with a different expression. The scope will apply only when the defined categories for that intersection are included in the query. You must also define a base expression for the rest of the cells to use.
What do we mean by data crossing? A data crossing can be thought of as an intersection between two category variables in a crosstab. In this crosstab of Profit by Date and Order Type, we can think of each cell as the intersection between Date and Order Type, or Date/Order Type. Because there are only two category data items in this cross tab (Order Type as the column and Date as the row), there is only one intersection. Because there is only one intersection, any scoped measure would apply to all cells.
To use a scoped aggregated measure, we need to have multiple unique crossings to apply different expressions to. Let's look at an example. Imagine we have a crosstab displaying profit by both month and year, and by type of order, with a subtotal displaying the total yearly profit. Now, there are multiple intersections. As before, most of the cells represent the intersection between Date and Order Type. However, the final subtotal row represents the intersection between Order Year and Order Type. Because of this, we can create a scoped aggregated measure with one expression for the Date/Order Type intersection and another for the Order Year/Order Type intersection. For example, we can use one expression to return the monthly profit sums, and another to return the monthly average for the yearly subtotal row.
The first step is to open the expression editor by creating a new calculated data item. Then, you need to define a base expression that will be evaluated everywhere. In this case, the base expression is sum Profit, by group. This is what will be evaluated for every cell except the specific data crossings that you define.
Next, you need to add a new scope by clicking the Add button next to the Scope field. Then, you select the data crossing that you want to use to create the scope. In this case, we're specifying the intersection of Order Year and Order Type
Then, you can define a separate expression that will only be evaluated at the intersection of Order Year and Order Type. In this example, the expression is the sum by group of Profit divided by 12, which creates a monthly average.
When you add the scoped aggregated measure to the crosstab, you'll notice that all of the monthly rows are exactly the same. This is because they are being calculated using the base expression. However, notice that the Subtotal row is now different in the Profit (Scope) column. In the subtotal row, Order Year intersects with Order Type, and so the scoped expression is evaluated instead, returning the monthly average rather than the sum.

=== Advanced Functions 322 ===
Next, let's discuss another set of aggregated functions available in SAS Visual Analytics. Advanced aggregated functions return aggregated statistics, beyond simple summary statistics. Advanced aggregated functions can also be used to conditionally hide certain aggregated values which can protect sensitive or confidential data.
There are eleven different advanced aggregated functions available in SAS Visual Analytics. Many return aggregated statistical measures and tests, such as the CoefVar or coefficient of variation, CSS or corrected sum of squares, Kurtosis, PvalT, and Skewness functions. Other options include First and Last, which calculate the first or last value of a measure based on chronological order. There is also a conditional function, Suppress, that will obscure aggregated data values for privacy.
More information about these functions can be found in the "Operators and Functions for Data Expressions" reference in the SAS Visual Analytics documentation.
The suppress advanced function does not return a statistical calculation. Rather, it hides certain aggregated values if a specified condition is true. This is particularly useful when reports contain sensitive or confidential data. Using the Suppress functions allows you to hide aggregated values in certain conditions where it would be easy to infer individual values. This can be used to restrict access to confidential data and protect privacy. Imagine that you have data consisting of school exam results. The results are aggregated in a list table, showing the name of the school, the number of students tested, and the average score. However, since only 1 student was tested at North High School, it might be too easy to infer what their individual results were based on the aggregated score.
To protect their privacy, we could instead suppress the Number Tested data item when it is below a certain value such as 5, so that report viewers will not be able to easily infer individual students' results. However, notice that because the summary row at the bottom of the total includes the total number of students, it's still possible to infer the number of students tested at North High School. The Suppress function requires a condition that determines when suppression is applied and the measure that is suppressed.
To prevent this, you can use the withComplement option in the Suppress function, rather than withoutComplement. This suppresses additional, complementary values so that not just a single value is hidden. In this example, the next closest value, East High School, is also hidden, so it is not possible to infer any values.
There are a few other considerations to be aware of when using the Suppress function, to ensure that any confidential information remains hidden. You should never use the unsuppressed version of the data item in your report, even in filters and ranks. You can hide the unsuppressed version using the Data pane. You should also avoid using suppressed data in any object that is the source or target of a filter action. Filtering can sometimes make it possible to infer the value of suppressed data. Finally, you should avoid assigning hierarchies to objects that contain suppressed data. Expanding or drilling down on a hierarchy can sometimes make it possible to infer the value of suppressed data.

=== Aggregated Simple Functions 341 ===
Aggregated operators allow you to create aggregated measures. In this section, we'll discuss some simple aggregated operators, which return aggregated summary statistics.
Let's begin by reviewing the difference between a calculated data item and an aggregated measure. In a calculated data item, the expression is evaluated for each row of unaggregated data, meaning that the expression will be evaluated for each observation in the source data before aggregations are performed. A calculated data item uses default aggregation behavior and accepts parameters. For an aggregated measure, the expression is evaluated on aggregated data. Aggregations are evaluated by context which is determined by the object's Role assignments. There are two contexts that can be used when defining an aggregated measure expression: By Group -- which calculates the aggregation for each subset of the data item, or For All -- which calculates aggregation for the entire data item (after filtering). The aggregation behavior is defined by the expression, and some of the aggregated operators accept parameters.
Aggregated measures can greatly enhance the possibilities of report design. For example, you might want to calculate a company's profit by region. Rather than trying to create many different calculated items, you can use aggregated functions to make this easy. You can simply take the aggregated sum of the profit for all the stores in a region group and divide it by the aggregated sum of the revenue for all the stores in that same region group. Aggregated measures make this sort of "by group" calculation easy.
Like the other functions we've discussed, aggregated operators are available in the expression editor, which can be accessed by creating a new data calculated item. In this section, we'll discuss several operators in the Aggregated (simple) group.
We'll start with the Count function. The Count function  calculates the total number of non-missing values of a measure or category for  a particular aggregation context. For instance, this table has two different  brands, five product lines,  and seven total records.  Using the ByGroup aggregation context and the Product Line column would return  the total number of non-missing values for the group. In this case, three rows are the  Novelty brand and four are  the Toy brand. Using the ForAll context would simply return the total number of  non-missing rows in the table – in this case, seven.
  The Distinct function is similar to the Count function, but  it calculates the number of distinct values in a data item, rather than the  number of non-missing values. Let's look at an example with the same table.  Using the ByGroup aggregation context and the Product Line column would return  the total number of distinct values for the group – in this case, two distinct  values for the Novelty brand (Promo and Bead) and three for the Toy brand (Game, Figure, and Plush). Using the ForAll context  would simply return the total number of distinct values for the whole table –  in this case, five.
  The Sum function calculates the sum or total of the values  of a measure for a particular aggregation context. Consider this example, where  there are seven  different sales across two different product brands and five different product lines, each with a  different profit. The Sum function with an aggregation context of ByGroup will  sum the profit values for each group, and the ForAll context will return just  the total sum of profit for the entire data set. Note that the ByGroup could be  different depending on how the aggregated measure is used – the same aggregated  measure could return the summed profit for a region, customer loyalty  membership, or any other group.

=== AggregateTable Function 136 ===
The other function available in the Aggregated (tabular) group is the AggregateTable function. AggregateTable performs aggregations on data crossings that are independent of (or changed from) the data in your objects. This can help reduce the need to use aggregate data sources. The AggregateTable function has two aggregation steps: the outer aggregation and the inner aggregation. The inner aggregation is created using the Table function, which defines the parameters of a table that is aggregated using the Table function. You can think of the Table function as returning an aggregated table. The outer aggregation specifies the aggregation that is applied to the measure after the inner table aggregations.
There are a few different options to specify in the inner aggregation. You must specify a method, or the aggregation type: sum, average, and so on. You must also specify the Group context which specifies how the aggregation is applied to the inner table. The three options are Fixed, Add, and Remove. Fixed aggregates the values for a specified set of categories, meaning that the aggregations are independent of the data crossing in objects. Add adds one or more categories to the data crossings (group-by context) in the object. Remove removes categories from the data crossings (group-by context) in the object. Finally, the Categories option specifies the list of categories used to alter the data crossing (or group-by context) for the aggregation. Let's look at a demonstration to get a better sense of how this works.

=== Create Times and Dates 139 ===
Some functions can take numeric inputs and return a SAS date value. The DateFromMDY function takes a numeric month, day, and year as input and returns the SAS date. The DateFromYQ function takes a numeric year and numeric quarter and returns the SAS date. The DateTimeFromHMS takes a SAS date and a numeric hour, minute, and second and returns the SAS datetime.
For example, you could supply the month 8, the day 1, and the year 2024 to the DateFromMDY function, and it will return a SAS date value, which can be displayed either as a number or formatted SAS date.
Let's discuss a few more functions. Often, you may need to reference the current date or time in an expression. The Now function does this. It takes no inputs and returns the current date and time as a SAS datetime value. If you need to extract either just the SAS date or just the SAS time, you can use the DatePart or the TimePart function to do so. DatePart returns the SAS date component from a SAS datetime value, and TimePart returns just the SAS time component.
Let's discuss one more function. The TreatAs function allows you to use a numeric, date, or datetime value as a different type of data within another function. The function takes two arguments: the type, which can be date, datetime, or number, and the value. For example, to calculate the difference in days between two dates, you can use the TreatAs function to treat them both as numbers and then do simple subtraction. The result would be a numeric value, indicating the number of days between the two dates.

=== Creating an Aggregated Data Source 231 ===
You can access the aggregated data source functionality from the Data source menu. Then, you need to select the columns that you want to aggregate. You can optionally add a simple filter when creating an aggregated data source. For example, you could limit the aggregated data source to a certain product line or customer type.
A preview of the aggregated data source will be displayed, and it's a good idea to examine it and make sure that the results are what you expect. The measure data items in your aggregated data source use the same aggregation and format as defined in the original data source. If you change the aggregation type in the original data source, the aggregated data source will change as well.
The result will be added to the report, but it is a temporary table generated when the report is opened, and it isn't available outside the report.
Aggregated data sources can be used on their own to simplify visualizations and reduce processing time. For example, you could use either the original data source or an aggregated data source to visualize profit across country. However, because the aggregated data source generally has significantly fewer rows and columns, processing time may improve by using the aggregated data source. Using an aggregate data source will not reduce processing time if the aggregated data is the same size as the original data source, or if a different aggregated data source is used for each report object.
Aggregated data sources can also be joined to the original data source, allowing you to use both the aggregated data and original data in a single object. For example, you can assign the aggregated data as the Target role in objects like the gauge to create standard comparisons across other categories. You can also use an aggregated data source to create nested aggregated measures by using the aggregated data source in aggregated measure calculations.
You can also use an aggregated data source to create nested aggregated measures. Recall that in the expression editor, when creating calculated items, aggregated functions do not accept aggregated measures as inputs. However, to achieve this, you can instead use a data item from an aggregated data source in an aggregated function. For example, you could create an aggregated data set containing countries and profit values and then join the aggregated data source and the original data.
Then, you could use a data item from the aggregated data source in an aggregated function. For example, the function returns the average country profit per order, for each by group.

=== Data Joins 458 ===
Data source joins enable you to combine two data sources. The join creates a temporary table that is executed every time that the report is opened.
Use data source joins to combine more than one data source in a single report object. You can also use them to create a multi-data source measure calculation. Do not use data source joins as a data-preparation tool to create a reporting data mart. It is recommended that any heavy lifting data processing be done before loading the data into CAS for reporting.
A data join and an append are two different data source actions. A data join combines two tables by matching data rows and adding columns. An append usually keeps the same column attributes and adds rows. Only the data join action is available in Visual Analytics.
Visual Analytics has four join types available. When defining the type of data join, the position of the tables determines the results. The industry standard is to call the two tables the left table or the right table. Recall from earlier that a join uses the matching criteria to look for common values and then adds the columns per the join specification. Let's walk through a simple example in which the number is representing our join match criterion. We can see that the left table contains the values 1 and 2, and the right table contains the values 1, 3, and 4. There is only one overlapping match value, 1.
Let's start with the left join. A left join selects all rows from the left table and only the matching rows in the right table. The result of this type of join has the same number of rows as the left table and includes both the matching and nonmatching rows from the left table.
Next, we have the right join. A right join selects all the rows from the right table and only the matching rows in the left table. The result of this type of join has the same number of rows as the right table and includes both the matching and nonmatching rows from the right table.
Next is the inner join. An inner join selects only the rows from the left table that match the rows from the right table, based on the join condition specified. The result of this type of join contains only matching rows.
And last is the full join. A full join selects all the rows from both the left and right tables. The result of this join contains both the matching and nonmatching rows from both tables.
Now I'd like to walk through a data join example in which we want to combine more than one data source in a single object. This is our target visualization. I'd like to build a bar chart that plots cylinders from the CARS_SPECS data source against the average of MSRP from the CARS_PRICING data source. I will use all the category data items for my matching criteria. Notice the data source CARS_SPECS on the left and CARS_PRICING on the right. For this example, I will perform a left join in which I want to keep all the rows with the cylinder data and keep only the rows that match with their MSRP values.
Now that I have a plan, let's execute. Using the Data source menu, select New data from join. You could select either New data from join option, but one gives you a list of available data sources in CAS versus the data sources that have been added to the report. Next, select the join type. The left data source is already selected because it's the data source that we started with, so select the right data source. Then use the add button to define the data item join mappings. Finally, at the bottom, select the data items that you want to include in the temporary result table.
Now when you view the available data sources in the report, you see the temporary table join result listed. You might notice that, if you included matching data items from both data sources, the data items from the right table have the table name added in parentheses. Now you can use the temporary table join result to build the desired bar chart. You can make any data item property edits that you want. In this case, I wanted the average MSRP, so I changed the aggregation from the default sum to average.
It's important when designing your reports to keep in mind that, with respect to performance, data joins are performed every time that the report is opened for every user. In regard to storage, data join results are temporary tables stored in the Casuser caslib that is visible only to the user who created the join, and the results are cleaned up automatically when no longer needed. Depending on the data sources, the temporary join results can be very large, and if many users access the report concurrently, then you could see performance issues. When considering joins, you can join only two separate tables. You cannot perform a self-join with the same data source. Also, only simple matching is available, and if date values are used in the matching criteria, make sure that the formats match. And most importantly, don't use data joins in the report to serve as your data preparation tool.

=== Difference from Previous Parallel Period 159 ===
Let's look at an example using the ParallelPeriod function. One common use for periodic functions is calculating the difference from the previous parallel period. In other words, imagine you want to calculate the difference in profit between the current month and the same month in the previous year. To do this, you can create an expression that calculates the aggregated value for one period (in this case, March of 2024) and then subtracts the aggregated value of the parallel period of the previous year (in this case, March of 2023). The result would be an aggregated measure, which can be used to show the monthly difference in profit, compared to the previous year. To use the ParallelPeriod function, you must specify both an inner interval and an outer interval. The inner interval specifies the period for which values are aggregated, and the outer interval specifies the context for the parallel periodic aggregation. In this example, the inner interval is monthly and the outer interval is yearly.
While it's possible to manually create this calculation, it can also be created from the quick calculation menu, available by right-clicking on a data item and selecting New calculation. You must then choose Difference from previous parallel period as the calculation type and select a date data item to use for the period calculation. The date data item's format must include a year.
The expression created looks like this. Notice that the ParallelPeriod function is used twice -- once to calculate the aggregated value for the current period, and once to calculate the aggregated value for the previous parallel period. This is indicated by an offset value of -1 in the second ParallelPeriod function. Notice also that the intervals are inferred, meaning the interval will be determined automatically. To manually change the interval, you could change these parameters. Finally, notice that all time-based filters are ignored by this expression.

=== Extract Times and Dates 154 ===
Date and time functions generally do one of two things. They can extract information such as date components from a SAS date or datetime value, or they can generate a SAS date or datetime value from non-date inputs.
As a reminder, SAS treats dates, time, and datetime data items as numbers and uses formats to style the numeric value into a human-readable date or time. A date data item is the number of days since January 1, 1960. A time data item is the number of seconds from midnight of the current day. And a datetime data item is the number of seconds since midnight January 1, 1960.
First, let's look at functions that take a SAS date value as input and return information about that date value. The Month, DayOfMonth, DayOfWeek, Year, and Quarter functions all accept a SAS date value as input and return a non-date value such as a date component.
The Month function returns a number 1 through 12 indicating the month of a particular SAS date, the DayOfMonth function returns a number 1 through 31 indicating what day of the month a date is, and the DayOfWeek returns a number 1 through 7 representing the day of the week where 1 is Sunday. The Year function takes a SAS date value and returns the numeric year, and the Quarter function returns a number 1 through 4 indicating the quarter.
All of these functions can be found in the expression editor, available by clicking New data item and selecting Calculated item. Then, click the Functions button, and the Date and Time section contains all of the date and time functions.
Then, complete the expression by supplying a SAS date as the input. For example, the DayOfWeek function takes a SAS date and returns a number 1 through 7 indicating Sunday through Saturday, where 1 is Sunday.

=== Lesson Overview 106 ===
In this section, we'll discuss advanced ways to create and manipulate data for reports.
You'll learn how to join two tables together to create a single data source.
You'll also learn how an aggregated data source works to reduce the size of an original data set, how to create them, how you can take advantage of them to improve performance, and other ways that they can be used.
In this lesson, we'll also dive deeper into the expression editor. We'll discuss how to create conditional expressions using the IFELSE operator, and we'll discuss how to use text functions to manipulate string data.
We'll discuss date and time functions, and we'll explore how to build expressions that extract information from SAS date and time values.
Then, we'll discuss aggregated functions, which enable you to calculate new data items by using aggregated values.
We'll discuss simple aggregated functions, that allow you to do things like calculate the sum, the minimum, and the maximum. We'll also discuss periodic and advanced aggregated functions, which allow you to do things like calculate time periods and advanced statistics.

=== Min and Max Functions 119 ===
Let's take a look at some of the other aggregated functions. The Min function will calculate the smallest value of a measure, and the Max function will calculate the largest value of a measure. For example, you could use this to display the highest or lowest priced item for a particular group. In this example, the MIN function returns the lowest value in the ByGroup aggregation context. By creating multiple bar charts with different categories, you can explore how the lowest price item varies across different groups.
The Min and Max functions can also be used with dates. Remember, dates in SAS are just numbers that represent the number of days since January 1st, 1960. While you can use the expression editor to manually calculate the minimum and maximum date, there is also a quick calculation option that does this for you. By right-clicking on a date and selecting New calculation, you can create a calculation with the type Min or Max. Behind the scenes, this creates an expression using the Min or Max function, as well as the TreatAs function to ensure that the result is correctly formatted as a date. You can use these calculations to quickly add information about the time period covered in a report or in an object. For example, you could use the Min function to display the earliest transaction date across countries and product lines.

=== Periodic Functions 407 ===
Let's discuss another type of aggregated function available in SAS Visual Analytics. Periodic functions aggregate values over time. Periodic functions are evaluated over time intervals, allowing you to analyze how data changes over time. Therefore, to use the periodic functions, your data source must contain date or datetime data items.
There are five different periodic functions available in SAS Visual Analytics: CumulativePeriod, ParallelPeriod, Period, PeriodWithDate, and RelativePeriod. CumulativePeriod returns the aggregated value for a period of time and for all of the previous periods of time within a larger period. For example, it could return the year-to-date total of monthly values. ParallelPeriod returns the aggregated value for a period of time that is parallel to the current period. For example, it could return the value for the same week of the previous year. Period returns the aggregated value for a period of time -- for example, the value for the current month. PeriodWithDate returns the aggregated value for a specific, constant period of time. For example, you can use it to return the aggregated value for a month including a specified date. Finally, the RelativePeriod function returns the aggregated value for a period of time that is relative to the current period. For example, you could use it to calculate the value for the previous week of the same year.
Each period function aggregates data over an interval, which you must specify. There are six different intervals available: ByDay, ByWeek, ByQuarter, ByMonth, ByYear, and Inferred. The Inferred option means that the interval is evaluated based on its context in the object. For example, if your report contains a bar chart of sales by quarter, then the inferred interval is quarter. The level of granularity will depend on the granularity of your data source. If your data is at the week level, then you will not be able to use the ByDay interval.
In addition to the interval, each periodic function has a number of other parameters that you must specify. Let's consider the CumulativePeriod function. You must specify the aggregation, which can be either average, count, distinct count, max, min, or sum. You also need to specify the measure being aggregated, and the date data item used for the period calculation. The CumulativePeriod function takes two intervals: inner and outer. The inner interval is the interval for which the values are aggregated. The outer interval provides the context for the aggregation. For example, you can specify ByMonth as the inner interval and ByYear as the outer interval to aggregate the year-to-date values for each month. Next, you can also specify the offset, or how many outer intervals to offset from the current period. For example, if your inner interval is by month and your outer interval is by year, then -1 specifies the year-to-date monthly values for the previous year. The starting point is when each new outer period begins. For example, if your inner interval is by week and your outer interval is by year, then 3 specifies that each year begins in the third week. Finally, you must specify the scope, which indicates how much of each period is aggregated: either the full period, to a specified date in the outer interval, or until the current day's position in the outer interval.
Each periodic function also has one other option that we need to discuss: the filters option. Here, you must specify which filters should be applied before processing the aggregated measure. There are three different options: ApplyAllFilters, IgnoreAllTimeFrameFilters, and IgnoreInteractiveTimeFrameFilters. Selecting ApplyAllFilters means that all filters in the report will be applied before the aggregated measure is processed, where as IgnoreAllTimeFrameFilters means that all filters based on the date data item used in the period function will be ignored. Selecting IgnoreInteractiveTimeFrameFilters means that only filters selected by the viewer using prompts and actions will be ignored.

=== Tabular Functions 222 ===
The final set of functions available in SAS Visual Analytics are the tabular functions available in the Aggregated (tabular) section of the expression editor. These functions allow you to perform aggregations on selected cells, calculate moving averages, return cumulative and median values, plus more.
The AggregateCells function aggregates the values of specific cells of the detail data table for an object. You must specify the aggregation type, the measure being aggregated, the direction, and the start and end point for the aggregation.
The Direction is the order in which the values should be aggregated. There are four options: Default, Column, Row, and Temporal. The Default option means the direction is selected automatically based on the contents of each object. For example, list tables are always aggregated by column. Column aggregates values for each column containing the aggregated measure, and Row aggregates values for each row containing the aggregated measure. Finally, the Temporal option aggregates across time. For crosstabs, values are aggregated along the axis that contains a date data item. For other objects, values are aggregated in the default direction.
Both the start point and end point are specified as CellIndex(location, offset). The location can either be start, current, or end. Start refers to the first value in a particular column or row, End refers to the last value, and Current refers to the current value. The offset value indicates the number of rows to offset from the specified location.
Let's look at an example. Imagine you have a list table containing monthly profit. You can use the AggreggateCells function to calculate a cumulative or running total for each month. Notice that the start-index and end-index specify the aggregation should begin at the first row, and that it should end at the current row. For example, the Cumulative Profit value for January 2012 is just $104,547, but the value for February 2012 is $104,547 plus $92,269. The cumulative total calculation is also available from the New calculation quick calculation menu.

=== Text Functions 450 ===
The expression editor also allows you to build character expressions using text functions. There are a wide variety of options, allowing you to manipulate string data, find and remove values, append strings together, replace strings or components of strings, and more.
To access text functions in the expression editor, you can create a new calculated item. The text functions can be found by clicking the Functions button where they are divided into two groups: simple functions and advanced functions. We will discuss several commonly used functions in this section.
Let's discuss some text operators that allow you to build complex, powerful expressions using string data. The Substring function, located in the Text (advanced) section, returns a substring from the input string based on the position of the characters. You need to specify the input string, or the character field you want to select from, the index, or the position in the field at which you want to begin, and the length, or the number of characters that you want to extract.
Consider an example. Imagine you use a column called Facility as the input-string in the Substring function, 3 as the index value, and 4 as the length. The first row in the input data item contains the string USBURLIN0101. The Substring function will begin at the 3 position, or the letter B. It will then extract four characters, beginning at the third position. The resulting output will be just the string BURL.
The Findchar function, located in the Text (advanced) section, finds the position of a character or set of characters within a text string. You need to specify the input string to search and the search characters to search for. Both can be data items from your report.
For example, using the FindChar function to search the data item Facility for the character "U" would return the position where the string is found in the input -- in this case, 1. If the string is not found, then 0 is returned.
The RemoveChars function, located in the Text (advanced) section, removes all instances of a set of characters from the input string. You need to specify an input string or data item you want to remove from and the list of characters to remove. Either one can be a data item from the report.
Consider an example. In this example, the input string is US_BUR-0101 and the list of characters to remove is _ and -. Both the underscore and the hyphen would be removed, and the result would be USBUR0101. There are several similar functions to be aware of as well. The RemoveWord function removes entire words, rather than just characters, and the RemoveBlanks function removes spaces.
The Replace function, located in the Text (advanced) section, replaces a substring within the input string with a replacement string. You need to specify the string or data item you want to search and replace in, the value you want to replace, and what you want to replace it with. These can all be data items from your report. You can also specify whether to replace all instances of the search term, just the first, or just the last.
Consider an example. The input string is US_BUR-01, and we are replacing the search US with United States. _ALL_ means that all instances where the search is found should be replaced. The result is United States_BUR-01, where the search term US has been replaced. You can also use the ReplaceWord function to replace a word from an input string in which the words are separated by spaces, periods, or other special characters.
The Concatenate function, located in the Text (simple) section, appends two strings together. You need to identify two strings to append. Both can be data items from your report. For example, the Concatenate function could take two strings US and BUR and return a single value USBUR.
There are a number of other functions available as well. The FindString function finds the position of a string within another string. This can be useful when used in combination with other functions that require an index value, such as the Substring function.
The GetLength function returns the length of an input string as a number. The GetWord function returns an individual word from an input string. The Reverse function reverses the order of the characters in an input string. The URLEncode function applies URL encoding to an input string. More functions are available in "Reference: Operators and Functions for Data Expressions" in the Working with Report Data documentation for SAS Visual Analytics.

=== The IFELSE Operator 111 ===
The IF-ELSE operator evaluates a Boolean condition and returns different values, depending on whether the condition is true or false. It can be nested, allowing you to evaluate a series of conditions using IF ELSE logic.
The IFELSE operator is available in the expression editor, accessed by selecting New data item and choosing Calculated item. It is located in the Boolean section in the Operators tab.
Next, in the first parameter, specify a condition to be evaluated. In this case, the condition being evaluated is whether or not Facility Continent is equal to North America. Next, specify the value that should be returned if the condition is true. Here, the value returned is Product Sale multiplied by 0.025.
Finally, specify a value to be returned if the condition evaluates to be false. You can even nest IFELSE expressions within one another to build more complex logic. For example, the ELSE expression here is a second IFELSE operator. If the Facility Continent value is not North America, then the second IF condition will be evaluated and another set of values will be returned.

=== What is an Aggregated Data Source 144 ===
An aggregated data source in SAS Visual Analytics is a feature that creates a new temporary data source containing an aggregated subset of columns from the original data source. This new data source is generated when the report is opened and is available only for that specific report and user.
Aggregated data sources can also be used to get aggregate data analysis when working with detailed data.
Because an aggregated data source typically has both fewer columns and fewer rows than the original data source, using it in a report can help improve performance. Aggregated data sources can also be used to create nested aggregated measure calculations.
Consider an example.
The original data set might contain thousands and thousands of rows, with each row representing an individual event or record -- in this case, an order. You could create an aggregated data source based on this original data set by choosing a subset of columns. The rows in the original data source are aggregated by the categories that you select, and measures are aggregated using the aggregation type defined in the original data source.
In this example, if you create an aggregated data set using the Continent Name and Profit columns, or Customer Country and Profit columns, the Profit column will be aggregated based on the Sum aggregation type defined in the original data source, for each value of Continent Name or Customer Country. While the original data set may contain thousands or tens of thousands of rows since it was at the Order ID level, the aggregated data set will contain far fewer, since it will be aggregated to the distinct number of Continent Names or Customer Countries. The aggregated data set will then be added as a new data source in your Visual Analytics report.

=== Alert with Display Rules 227 ===
Alerts are notifications that are triggered by a set of data conditions defined by an expression display rule. To enable or disable an alert, you must be editing the report. The available recipients are registered SAS Viya users managed by an administrator. Subscribers of the alert will receive an email notification when the conditions are met based on the notification frequency. Alert messages also appear in the notifications area of the application bar.
The notification frequency is the cadence of how often users are notified. You can select between daily, hourly, or every minute and specify a corresponding interval. A notification will be sent the first time an alert is triggered, then will next be sent if the alert condition is met, at the specified interval.
The query frequency is how frequently the system checks to see whether the alert condition has been met. You can select between system default (which is every 10 mins), daily, hourly, or every minute at a corresponding interval. Regardless of how often the system checks to see if the alert condition is met, only the last state is checked at the notification frequency interval and if triggered, an alert will be sent.
Let's look at an example alert definition where the notification frequency is set to 7 days and the query frequency is set to once a day.
After the alert is defined, a notification is sent the first time the alert condition is triggered. For example, suppose that an alert created on Day 1 is triggered for the first time at 10:00 a.m. on Day 2. As a result, a notification is sent at 10 a.m. on Day 2.
Because the notification frequency is set to once every 7 days, the soonest that the next alert notification can be sent is on Day 9 at 10:00 a.m. This is true regardless of how often the alert criteria are met before that time.
At 10 a.m. on Day 9, SAS Visual Analytics determines whether the alert condition was triggered at the last system check. If it was, then a notification is sent. If it was not, then a notification is sent the next time the alert condition is triggered. For example, if the next alert is triggered at 8:00 a.m. on Day 11, then the notification is sent out. Based on this activity, the soonest that the next notification can be sent is 8:00 a.m. on Day 18.
If the notification frequency is modified, then the notification history is reset.

=== Data Source Mappings 105 ===
When creating a page or report link, if the source and the target use different data sources,
    Visual Analytics prompts you to map the data sources.
    Mapping is a way to treat a value in one data source as another value in a second data source.
    For report links, you must map the data sources when creating the link.


For page links, however, you can also globally map data sources by selecting the map data option in the data pane.


    When mapping data sources, there are some things to consider.
    When data sources are mapped, an automatic filter is applied to all prompt areas and the canvas by default.
    Alternatively, you can select the Set Prompt Bar Values of Target Page option
    or the Set Prompt Bar Values of Target Report option to select values in the prompt area instead of filtering all values.
    In addition, a column in one data source can be mapped only once to another data source.
    If you need to use the column more than once, then you can duplicate it for mapping.
    Lastly, mapped columns must have the same format. This is very important for date columns.

=== External URL Links 311 ===
In addition to adding page links and report links, you can also specify a URL link, which
    enables you to access and view an external web page.
    You can create a static link, which goes to a single web page or an interactive link that
    passes a value from the report to the web page with a parameter.



    To create interactive links, follow four simple steps.
    1.
    Research the structure of the URL 2.
    Use a hard-coded value to test the link 3.
    Parameterize the link 4.
    Test the parameterized value



    First, you need to research the structure of the URL for the target page.
    Before adding interactive links to a report, it's important to understand how the target
    web page structures the URL.
    You can do this by accessing the target web page and searching for a specific subject.
    For some websites, you might need to read the developer guide for the website to fully
    understand the structure.


URLs are typically constructed in one of three ways, path, query, or file.


    In a path URL, the subject is added at the end of the URL.
    For example, to view a country page on Wikipedia, you use the following URL, where country is
    the full name of the country.
    In a query URL, the subject is assigned to the value of a URL parameter using a sequence
    of attribute value pairs.
    Parameter 1 equals value 1 and parameter 2 equals value 2.
    Multiple parameters can be assigned by separating the attribute value pairs with an ampersand.
    For example, to search Amazon for a specific item, you use the following URL, where k is
    the parameter and item is the specific search string.
    In a file URL, the subject is the part of a file name at the end of the URL.
    For example, to view a country profile at country reports, you use the following URL,
    where country name is the name of the country of interest.
    Each of these URL structures will need to be handled in a slightly different way in
    visual analytics.



    After you understand the structure of the URL, you use various hard-coded values from
    your data to test the link.
    For example, for Wikipedia, I can test the link by changing the country value to Spain
    or Chile.
    This ensures that the URL correctly returns different pages depending on the value entered.



    Next, you need to replace the hard-coded value with parameters.
    These are values that are passed from your report to the external URL to make the links
    interactive.
    The value used as the parameter must be assigned to a role for the object.
    Depending on the structure of the URL, you might need to create new calculated items
    to pass the correct value to the external web page.
    These calculated items can be added to the hidden role so that they are available for
    the link but are not displayed in the report.
    In this example, the value for country is used as the parameter and appended to the
    URL to return, the Wikipedia page for the selected country.



    Finally, you test the link in the report to ensure that it's passing the correct values
    to the external web page and displaying the correct page.

=== Gauge-Level Display Rules 044 ===
The last rule type to cover is the Gauge-Level display rule. The only available rule is the gauge. It applies to the gauge object and once you add the object to the report and assign Data Roles, a default three interval display rule is defined.
You can manually edit the intervals or you can use the toolbar and select Recalculate. This will allow you to select the number of intervals and the min and max endpoints. After the intervals are defined you can change the colors.
In this screenshot you can see all variations of gauge shapes and styles of gauges you can create. The default gauge is shape: dial and style: speedometer.
We have now gone through all of the available Display Rules and their supported types.

=== Graph-Level Display Rules 431 ===
Graph-Level Display Rules have two rule types available: color-mapped values and expression. The expression display rule for graphs allows you to choose to style either the graph element or the background. Display rules can be layered and reordered within the same column. The display rule expression can also reference data items not assigned a Data Role in the graph object.
Let's look at the steps to define each of these types of display rules for a graph object. First, open the Display Rules pane. Next, we will need to define a New rule and then select a data item. For a color-mapped values display rule, you can select Any Category. This means that the color-mapped value display rule will be applied to any category value across all category data items for the data source. Or you can select the category data item assigned to the graph object. The data items that have been assigned to the object lie in between the separators. Note that date or datetime data items are not available for color-mapped values display rules.
For an expression display rule, you can select any measure data item in the data source.
Next we need to define the display rule. First let's look at the color-mapped values definition. In this example, we have selected the category data item assigned a Data Role in the graph object, Product. Now type the value we want to highlight; in this example we have entered iPhone Cover. Then select the color we want to style the graph element.
Next, let's look at an expression display rule definition. In this example, we have selected the measure data item Expenses. Next, build your Boolean expression using the available operators and the value to compare with. The value can be a typed static value, a measure data item or parameter. Then select the style area. Pick between styling the graph element or the background. You can pick a color and transparency.
Here are more examples of Graph-Level Display Rules. Let's look at the top two graphs that have color-mapped values display rules applied. In order for the display rule to be applied, the treemap can not have the Color Data Role assigned. Notice how the box plot uses the color-mapped values display rule.
Next, let's look at an applied expression based display rule where the graph element is styled. The bar chart is behaving as expected. The line chart on the other hand, notice that only the markers are colored per the display rule. The line in the line chart will not change colors, to see the applied display rule for line charts, use the Options pane to show markers.
Last, is an example of an applied expression based display rule where the background is styled. One way to use this type of display rule is to serve as a reference line that can help the user see where graph elements lay. The priority order of this technique of display rules is important to build the desired result.
Some Data Roles or graph Options must be applied in order to view the display rule.
You can also apply display rules to geographic objects. Like the other graph objects, both color-mapped values and expression based display rules are available. In this color-mapped values example, I selected the Any Category and provided the Facility Region values of North, South, East, and West. We can see that in the geo map above, we are looking at Facility State, but the category data item Facility Region is assigned a non-visible Data Role and that is how we can see the color-mapped values display rule being applied.
In our next example, we can see we have the same data points plotted, but I have replaced the standard markers with an icon. We can also see in the Display Rules pane that we are using an expression based display rule and in addition to color, each rule also has an icon selected.
Here are a few geo map display rule considerations: the icons are only available for Geo Coordinate or Geo Network maps. The basic and custom icons are available when using the color chip picker. The Display Rule will override the Color Data Role assignment for geographic objects.
Here is a better look at the available icons that can be used on either the Geo Coordinate or Geo Network maps. The basic tab shows the generic industry icons available. These icons respond to a color selection.
The Custom tab is where you can point to or upload a custom icon. Note that custom icons are static images and they do not respond to a color selection.

=== Lesson Overview 104 ===
In this lesson, you will learn about using display rules which dynamically color category and measure values, parameters which allow for robust and interactive calculations and links which can be to reports, pages or fully qualified URLs.
Using SAS Visual Analytics, you can create interactive reports using actions and links. Parameters provide even more interactivity by putting more control into the hands of the viewer. Parameters are a special type of data item whose values can be changed by report viewers or based on the data. When a report viewer changes the value of the parameter, or the data changes, objects that use that parameter (like calculated items, display rules, filters, and ranks) are updated automatically to reflect the change. Parameters enable viewers to see what they want, when they want to see it, without having to ask a report designer to change the report for them.
In this lesson, you learn how to use numeric parameters, character parameters, date parameters, and expression-based parameters to make your reports more dynamic.

=== Linking from Text Objects 054 ===
You can also add a link from a text object to a page in the same report, another report, or an external URL, but this is not done in the Actions pane.
To do this, you need to enter text for the link, highlight the text, and use the links dropdown to select the type of link to add.

    For page links, you can select the target page, set prompt bar values of target page, and map data sources if the text object and the target page use different data sources.
    For report links, you can select the target report, specify which page to open set prompt bar values of target report, and map data sources if the text object and the target report use different data sources.
    For external links, you can specify the external URL. If the text object has a measure or parameter assigned, you can also specify parameters for the external link.

=== Links 041 ===
Links can be created in the Actions pane.
    They enable you to provide additional context
    to the data presented in the report.
    Your report should focus on telling a single data story
    with a limited number of pages and objects.
    Links enable the report designer to focus
    on a specific part of that story
    without trying to show all the information at once.
    Three types of links are available,
    page links, report links, and URL links.
    Links have elements of both a filter and an action.
    Links automatically filter the target, page, or report
    if both the source and target use the same data source.
    If they do not, you need to specify a data source mapping.

=== Page Links 108 ===
Page links enable you to access another page in the same report, including hidden pages
    and pop-up pages.
    When linking to a basic or hidden page, a link appears in the upper left corner to return
    to the previous page.
    In addition, you can click the incoming filter information button to view incoming filters
    and toggle them off.



    When linking to a pop-up page, the page appears in a window that takes up a portion of the
    screen.
    You can click close to return to the previous page.



    Page links are useful for providing information to report viewers on how to navigate the report,
    like detailed tips on how to use the report, descriptions of report objects, and information
    about actions and links, or to provide detailed data.
    Page links can also be used to reduce clutter.
    Instead of creating a page with many objects, consider creating multiple pages with fewer
    objects and using page links to navigate between them.
    Lastly, page links can be used to guide viewers through the report.
    For example, you can have an overview or table of contents page that links to the pages in
    the report in the order in which they should be viewed.

=== Report Links 054 ===
Report links enable you to access another report.
    If the target report contains multiple pages,
    you can specify which page appears first when defining the link.
    Hidden and pop-up pages cannot be selected.
    When linking to a report,
    a link appears in the upper left corner to return to the previous page.
    In addition, you can click the incoming filter information button
    to view incoming filters and toggle them off.



    Report links are useful for connecting data stories.
    Even though there is no limit to the number of pages that you can add to your report,
    it's a good idea to limit the number of pages to make your report easier to access,
    easier to navigate, and easier to understand.
    If you need more than six or seven visible pages to tell your data story,
    you should consider creating multiple reports
    and using links between them to provide additional information.

=== Report-Level Display Rules 305 ===
Starting with the Report-Level Display Rule, the only rule type that is supported is color-mapped values. A Report-Level Display Rule is applied across all of the report objects on all of the pages. This helps provide consistent category data value coloring across the report. Also, Report-Level Display Rules are not tied to a data source, but instead a general definition that applies to the report. If multiple Display Rules are defined, then Object-Level Display Rules take precedence.
Why use a Report-Level Display Rule? First, to be able to quickly assign colors to category values across the entire report. Second, to be able to comply with corporate or brand requirements. And third, and maybe the most important when telling your data story, is to have consistent colors for category values across multiple pages regardless of prompt selections and filters.
For example, if you had a report looking at holiday décor sales, and you wanted to add meaningful color, which color mapping would you pick? Most people associate certain colors with holidays, so I would guess that the colors on the right-hand side resonate with expectations. You would want this color assignment to remain consistent throughout the report, and we can achieve that with Report-Level Display Rules.
To apply a Report-Level Display Rule, first use the drop-down menu at the top of the right pane and select the report name. This will place us at the Report-Level. Next, open the Display Rules pane. Third, select to define a new rule. Now we must define our color-mapped values. Type in the value of a category data item and then select the color you want mapped to the value. Notice that when you start typing it will automatically filter the available category values in the data source. Use the plus to add additional color-mapped values to the definition. Now we have our Report-Level Display Rule definition. Notice that this applies to any category in the report regardless of data source. You can easily edit the color selection by selecting the color chip or you can use the pencil icon to edit the rule to add additional color-mapped values.
You can also define a color-mapped values display rule at the Object-Level and promote it to a Report-Level Display Rule.
When defining Report-Level Display Rules, here are some things to consider. First, some objects may require the group Data Role assignment to be filled before the Report-Level Display Rule will be applied. Second, some objects may not display as expected. You may need to define an Object-Level Display Rule to override the Report-Level so that you can enhance the formatting to see the text clearly. Like in this example with the List table, the text does not automatically change color to make it more visible and this can be corrected with defining an Object-Level Display Rule. And third, some objects may not be affected by Report-Level Display Rules at all. In this example, we can see that the Crosstab object is not affected. Analytic objects, such as forecasting and heat maps, also do not support display rules.

=== Set Prompt Bar Values 217 ===
When the Set Prompt Bar values of target page or Set Prompt Bar values of target report
    option is not selected, if the source and the target use the same data source, an automatic
    filter is applied.
    This filter is applied to all areas of the page, page-prompt area and canvas, or all
    areas of the report, report-prompt area, page-prompt area, and the canvas.



    If you would like to change this behavior, you can select the Set Prompt Bar values of
    target page or the Set Prompt Bar values of target report option.
    When this option is set, no filtering is applied to the target report or page.
    Instead, values and prompts are selected.



    These options set prompt values only at the same level at which they are applied.
    This means that for page links, the Set Prompt Bar values of target page option selects only
    values and prompts at the page level, and for report links, the Set Prompt Bar values
    of target report option select only values and prompts at the report level.


    
    In this example, a page link is established between the bar chart and the target page.
    The bar chart shows the number of products produced in each supplier continent by order
    type, and the target page contains a page prompt to filter by supplier continent and
    a list table in the canvas that shows the number of products by supplier country and
    order type.



    With the default behavior, the Set Prompt Bar values of target page option not set,
    if I double-click the bar for internet orders in North America, all areas of the target
    page are filtered.
    The prompt shows only North America, and the list table shows only internet orders in North
    American countries.
    In addition, I can view incoming filters and toggle them off.



    When I select the Set Prompt Bar values of target page option for the page link and I
    double-click the bar for internet orders in North America, nothing on the target page
    is filtered, but a value in the prompt is set.
    North America is selected in the page prompt, so the list table shows details for all order
    types in North America countries.
    Notice that because there are no prompts for order type, no values are selected for order
    type, and all order types appear.
    To select a specific order type, a control needs to be added to the page prompt area
    for this data item.

=== Table-Level Display Rules 531 ===
Table-Level Display Rules can be defined for the list table or crosstab objects. Use Table-Level Display Rules to identify specific areas of interest.
Starting with the list table, the available rules types are color-mapped values, expression, and gauge. This is the only object that has the ability to have all three types of display rules applied. The display rules can be layered, and the first rule has priority. Display rules are applied to either a column or row. Display rules can only be reordered within the same column or row. And the list table display rules can reference data items not assigned a Data Role in the object.
Let's look at the steps to define each of these types of display rules for a list table. First, open the Display Rules pane. Next, we will need to define a New rule and then select a data item. For a color-mapped values display rule, you can select Any Category. This means that the color-mapped value display rule will be applied to any category value across all category data items for the data source. Or you can select the category data item assigned to the list table object. The data items that have been assigned to the object lie in between the separators. Note that date or datetime data items are not available for color-mapped values display rules.
For an expression display rule, you can select any measure data item in the data source.
And for a gauge display rule, you can also select any measure data item in the data source.
List table display rules can reference data items not assigned a Data Role in the object.
Next we need to define the display rule. First let's look at the color-mapped values definition. In this example, we have selected the category data item assigned a Data Role in the list table, Product Line. Now type the value we want to highlight; in this example we have entered Promotional. Then select the color we want and the placement of the color. We have selected to color the entire row, but you could select one of the columns in the list table. However, use caution when selecting a different column to surface the display rule as you don't want to confuse the report viewers.
Next, let's look at an expression display rule definition. In this example, we have selected the measure data item Profit. Next, you'll need to select the rule type, select Expression. You can choose to label your expression display rule so that it is clear what the rule is highlighting, then build your Boolean expression using the available operators and the value to compare with. The value can be a typed static value, a measure data item or parameter. Then style the format for those rows which return true for the expression and select the highlighting placement, in this example we selected the Profit column.
Last, let's look at the gauge display rule definition. In this example, we have selected the measure data item Expenses. Next, select Gauge as the rule type. Then you can manually edit the intervals or you can use the toolbar and select Recalculate. This will allow you to select the number of intervals and the min and max endpoints. After the intervals are defined you can change the colors. Then select the gauge type and the column and placement of the gauge.
Now that we've defined our display rules, let's take a look at the different placement choices and the types of available gauges. First is the row placement for color-mapped values and expression display rules. We can see that when the row is selected, it applies to the entire row of the list table. Second is the Product Line column placement. We can see that the display rule is only applied to that column. And similarly, when selecting the Profit column placement, the display rule only is applied to that column. And at the bottom, I have duplicated the expenses measure data item so that I can add it to the table multiple times, with different gauge types. I kept the same interval and color definitions but changed only the gauge type, moving from left to right you can see the bullet, icon, slider, and thermometer. Remember to use caution if you chose a different column to surface a display rule that was not used in the definition, it could confuse your report viewers.
The crosstab object only has the expression type display rule available. Unlike the list table, crosstab display rules require the measure to be assigned a Data Role in the object. The display rules can be layered and reordered within the same column. The display rule can be applied to a column or intersection. If the crosstab contains multiple column or row variables, then you can specify the cell intersections to apply the display rule.
Let's examine one of the display rules defined in this screenshot. You would define the display rule like any other expression based display rule, in this example we selected Unit Yield (actual). We will identify the Unit Yield (actual) values greater than three million at the intersection Facility Region / Product Line / Date by Year. In looking at our crosstab example, we can see that if those cells at the intersection return true for this expression, then we want to style the font bold green. In this example, the intersection is to look at Facility Region, West, then Product Line, Game, then Date by Year, 2011, and then we have the cell for which the expression will be evaluated, is 3,890,627 greater than 3,000,000? If true, then style bold green.

=== Types of Parameters 103 ===
A parameter is a variable whose value can be changed and that can be referenced by other objects. Parameters add interactivity to a report by enabling viewers to see what they want, when they want to see it, without having to ask a report designer to change the report for them. SAS Visual Analytics supports three different kinds of parameters: numeric, character, and date/datetime.
Parameters can help make your reports more dynamic by giving report viewers added control over their view of the report. They can be used in a variety of places in a report, including calculations, filters, text objects, ranks, display rules, or URL links.
To use parameters effectively, you need to follow three simple steps: create the parameter, populate the parameter, and apply the parameter. First, you'll need to determine the type of parameter that is required for your scenario: character, numeric, or date.
The easiest way to determine the parameter type is to think about what exactly you want report viewers to enter.

=== Using Character Parameters 306 ===
On the other hand, if you want the report viewer to choose a category or enter an alphanumeric string (for example, to choose a sales region and update the compensation numbers with bonus plan for that region), then you need to create a character parameter.
Character parameters can be created in the same three ways: using the New data item button, from within the Expression Editor, and by right-clicking on a data item.
Regardless of which option you select, in the New Parameter window, choose Character as the Type value. Unlike the numeric parameter, where you can also set minimum and maximum values, the only additional property you can modify is the Default value, which sets a starting value for the parameter. The Multiple values check box enables the parameter to accept more than one value.
It can only be used with a list control, and only used in the In, NotIn, and IsSet operators in filters and calculated expression.
Just like with numeric parameters, you populate the parameter by adding a control object to allow the report viewer to modify the parameter value.
The available control objects for character parameters are: text input, list, drop-down list, and button bar.
Note that the list control object can be used with a multiple-value character parameter.
Once you have selected the desired control object and dragged it to the canvas, you can select the parameter in the Actions pane. Click the New button and choose the parameter you want to populate with the control. The parameter stores the value that the report viewer selects, but you will also need to add a data item to the Category role in the Data Roles pane to populate the control with the options for the report viewer to select from. The data type assigned to the control must match the parameter type, so in this case, you need to select a category data item.
In the resulting drop-down control, the available choices are populated by the category data item assigned to the control, and the selection that the report viewer makes updates the value of the parameter assigned to the control.
Character parameters can be used in calculated items and aggregated measures, anywhere that a character value makes sense. They can also be used in detail filters, aggregate filters, and data source filters, anywhere a character value makes sense. When a parameter is used in a data source filter, the filter will not apply to the control object associated with the parameter. Parameter values can also be specified in URLs when sharing a report link, and they can be displayed in text objects.
For example, to use a character parameter in a calculated item, click the New data item button in the Data pane and select Calculated item. In the Expression Editor, the available parameters can be found by clicking the Data button and expanding the Parameter section.
Simply build the expression that creates the desired result, using the parameter as a variable in the calculation. For example, this calculated item uses conditional logic to return a different result for each possible value of the parameter.
The preview results displayed in the window will be based on the current value of the parameter.

=== Using Date Parameters 313 ===
The third type of parameters is date parameters. You should choose a date parameter if you want your user to enter or to select a date or datetime. For example, you would use a date parameter to allow a user to select a date and then view the previous thirty days of profit from that selected date.
Date parameters can be created in the same three ways as character and numeric parameters: using the New data item button, from within the Expression Editor, and by right-clicking on a data item.
When creating a date or datetime parameter, you'll select Date or Datetime as the parameter type. Date parameters contain just a date, whereas datetime parameters also contain the time of day. Like with numeric parameters, you can also specify a current or initial value.
Just like with the other types of parameters that we have previously discussed, you populate the parameter by adding a control object to allow the report viewer to modify the parameter value.
The available control objects for date and datetime parameters are: text input, slider, drop-down list, and button bar.
Once you have selected the desired control object and dragged it to the canvas, you can select the parameter in the Actions pane. Click the New button and choose the parameter you want to populate with the control.
To  define the minimum and maximum values for the control object, there are two  options. You can manually specify the range minimum and the range maximum  values in the Options pane, or you can assign a date data item to the  Measure/Date role in the Roles pane to automatically populate the minimum and  maximum values based on the range of the data item. The value that the report  viewer selects using the control will then update the value of the parameter.
Like with other types of parameters, the final step is to apply them by using them in your report. Date and datetime parameters can be used in calculated items and aggregated measures, anywhere that a date makes sense. They can also be used in display rules as the value of an expression rule for a date or datetime data item. Date parameters can be used in detail filters, aggregated filters, and data source filters anywhere it makes sense to have a date value. However, when a parameter is used in a data source filter, the filter will not apply to the control object associated with the parameter. Parameter values can also be specified in URLs when sharing a report link, and they can be displayed in text objects.
For example, to use a date parameter in a filter, select the object that you want to be filtered by the parameter, click the Filters pane, and click New filter.
Select the data item to base the filter on, then click More and choose Advanced edit.
In the Advanced Edit window, the available parameters can be found by clicking on the Data button and expanding the Parameters section.
Then, you can simply build an expression using the parameter as a data item. For example, this expression will return only the rows where the TransactionDate was within 30 days of the data value stored in the SelectDate parameter.
When the report viewer updates the value of the parameter using the slider control, the filter will be reevaluated, and the data displayed in the time series plot will update.

=== Using Expression-Based Parameters 318 ===
So far, all the parameters that we have discussed allow the report user to update the value of the parameter using a control object. However, there is another option. Expression-based parameters allow you to specify an expression to set the value of a parameter.
Expression-based parameters can be used with numeric, date values or character values. For example, you can use expression-based parameters to calculate the average profit per sale across an entire data set, and then use that parameter in other calculations to determine the difference from the average across regions and products, without the parameter being affected by filters or actions.
The process of creating an expression-based parameter is the same. You can create a parameter using the New data item button, from within the Expression Editor, and by right-clicking on a data item.
However, unlike the previous examples that we have discussed, you can also populate the parameter with an expression instead of with a control. To do this, rather than leaving the Default Value field blank or simply entering a static value, you can instead click Edit as expression to open an expression editor that defines the value of the parameter. For example, you can use an expression-based parameter to store the average per-order profit across an entire data set. The Expression Editor allows you to define the parameter's value using operators, a wide range of numeric, date-time and character functions, data items, other parameters, and filters and ranks for the expression. Once the parameter has been defined, its current value can be displayed by hovering over it in the Data pane.
Expression-based parameters can be used anywhere a regular parameter can be used. Because they are not affected by filters or actions in the report and are based on the entire data source, their value will remain constant no matter which filters or actions the user interacts with.
Although expression-based parameters can be used anywhere a regular numeric or date parameter can be used, they are particularly powerful for use in scenarios where you need to calculate the percent of a total, benchmark target values, or set the initial values of control objects.
For example, an expression-based parameter could be used in a calculated data item to calculate the difference between an individual order's profit and the total average profit per order. Because the parameter is defined using an expression, its value will update as new data is added, updating the value of the calculated item.
Then, that new calculated item can be used in visualizations as a benchmark value to compare with an individual region. In this example, the user can select a region to compare with the global average using a control, and the control is linked to the bar chart by a filter action. However, because the expression-based parameter referenced in the calculated item is based on the whole data source and happens outside the context of this particular visualization, its value is not impacted by the control.
Consider another example. By using date functions, you can create an expression-based parameter that returns the current date and a second one that returns 180 days before the current day. You could then use these parameters in a slider control to set the initial minimum and maximum values in a slider, to ensure that the initial selection is always the past 180 days, no matter when the report is opened.

=== Using Numeric Parameters 322 ===
Next, let's talk about the numeric parameters. If you want your viewer to enter a number (for example, to choose the number of rolling quarters or to view the number of top products to display), then you need to create a numeric parameter.
There are three ways to create a parameter. You can use the New data item menu and select Parameter. Then, in the New Parameter window, select Numeric as the type. For numeric parameters, you can edit the name of the parameter, and the current or starting value. You can also specify a format to display the parameter values.
You can also create a new parameter using the Expression Editor. To open the Expression Editor, use the New data item menu and select Calculated item. Then, in the Expression Editor, select New Parameter to open the New Parameter window. Use this window to select the type of parameter, define the minimum and maximum values, and the other properties.
The third way to create a parameter is by right-clicking on a data item in the Data pane and selecting New parameter. This will open the New Parameter window. However, unlike the previous methods, the name field will be pre-populated based on the data item you selected, and the default value will be populated based on the range of values in the selected data item as well. You can then make any edits necessary.
Once you have created a parameter, the next step is to populate it.
In this step, you add a control object to the report canvas that enables the report viewer to modify the value of the parameter.
The available control objects for numeric parameters are: text input, slider, drop-down list, and button bar.
Note that the drop-down list and button bar control objects are only supported when a discrete numeric data item is assigned.
Once you have selected the desired control object and dragged it onto the report canvas, you can add the parameter from the Actions pane in the Parameter Links section. Click the New button and select the parameter you want to populate the control.
For example, when using a slider control, in the Options pane, you can specify the range minimum and range maximum values for the control. The value that the report viewer selects will be stored in the parameter.
The final step is to apply the parameter and use it in your report. Numeric parameters can be used in calculated items and aggregated measures, anywhere that a numeric value makes sense. They can also be used in display rules as the value of an expression rule. They can be used in detail filters, aggregated filters, and data source filters anywhere it makes sense to have a numeric value. However, when a parameter is used in a data source filter, the filter will not apply to the control object associated with the parameter. Numeric parameters can also be used in ranks for the n or count value of the rank. Parameter values can also be specified in URLs when sharing a report link, and they can be displayed in text objects.
For example, to use a numeric parameter in a rank, select the object that you want to be controlled by the parameter, click the Ranks pane, and click New rank. Then, select the parameter that you want to control the rank in the Control field. In this case, the value that the report viewer selects on the slider control updates the parameter value, which is then used to determine the number of bars to display in the bar chart.

=== Working with Display Rules 038 ===
An expression display rule is based on a measure data item Boolean expression; it accepts numeric parameters. A color-mapped value display rule is based on a category data item value. A gauge display rule is based on a measure data item interval definition. It has four types of gauges available: icon, bullet, slider, and thermometer. The gauge type of display rule is not the same as a gauge-level display rule.
Here is a summary of the supported combinations of Display Rule levels and types. The rest of the lesson will walk through each Display Rule level in this order.

=== Distributing Reports and Generating Alerts 356 ===
Distributing reports automates the process of delivering updated content to report users. The distribute report feature sends an email to a recipient list and can optionally post to a Microsoft Teams channel. This distribution includes a link to the report. If the user is not signed in to Visual Analytics, then the user must provide valid credentials. The distribution can optionally include an attached PDF of the report and a report summary which is a feature defined in the report's options.
In order to generate alerts, report objects must have a display rule defined. The alert is generated when the condition is met. For example, when the temperature exceeds 100 degrees, or if today's revenue exceeds last month's. An email is sent to a recipient list only saying that the alert condition was met and a link is provided to the report.
You can distribute reports using SAS Visual Analytics. Distributing reports automates the process of delivering updated content to report users. You can distribute reports once or at recurring intervals, such as daily, multiple times daily, weekly, monthly, or yearly. In addition, distributing reports gives you the ability to generate reports during non-peak hours.
The Distribute Report window enables you to schedule, unschedule, run now, and delete the distributions that you are authorized to view.

=== Exporting and Saving Images 526 ===
In an offline capacity, there are several options to export a Visual Analytics report either in its entirety or a subset of the report. You can export to a PDF document. You can export a report package, which is a snapshot of the data and query results for a report. You can then use the report package to view the report offline or you could host the offline report on a webserver for others to access. You can export the summary or detailed data that makes up a report object. You can also save a report object as an image file.
From Edit and View mode, you can export a report as either a PDF or as Report package. In the options, you can select either the whole report, pages of the report, or even individual objects.
At the object level, you can export the object as an image, a PDF, or the data that makes up that object.
Also at the object level, you can define a display rule that will email a recipient list that the condition has been met.
In the Export as PDF options, you can specify page setup, margins, and options that allow you to include things like page numbers, empty rows and columns in tables, a table of contents, appendix information, expand clipped and non-visible content which is an important feature as it will print all of the returned rows, within the data threshold.
By default, an appendix is included in the PDF if the report, page, or object has descriptions, filters, warnings, errors, or display rule legends.
When exporting to PDF, you should keep a few things in mind:
Data-driven content objects and web content objects are not included in the PDF. To print static web content, configure the webContentRendererLink property for the Report Renderer Service.
Hidden pages, report prompts, page prompts, and prompt containers are not included in the PDF. However, any filters that are applied to an object are displayed in an appendix.
By default, containers print only the currently selected object.
If a list table or a crosstab has scroll bars, then some of the scrolled content might not be printed. However, more columns or rows might be printed than are visible in SAS Visual Analytics. The print feature attempts to fill the space available on the page in the PDF.
There can be differences in the fonts in a printed report if the fonts that are used to create a report do not match the fonts that are available on the server that generates the PDF.
When exporting data at the object level, there are several formats available: Microsoft Excel, tab-separated values (TSV) files, and a comma-separated values (CSV) files.
When exporting data, you can choose which columns and the number of rows that you want to export. You can also define if you want to export the detailed data and whether or not the data should be formatted.
SAS Visual Analytics can preserve the crosstab or the list table structure when you export data to an Excel workbook.

=== Lesson Overview 041 ===
Once you have finished creating your report, you will likely want to share it with other users. SAS Visual Analytics supports a wide variety of ways to share reports, from sharing individual report objects to exporting the entire report. In this lesson, you'll learn about the different methods to share and distribute reports, both online and offline.
You'll also learn about other ways to manage your reports. We will discuss customizing which functionality is available when viewing a report, how to localize your reports to accommodate users in multiple languages, how to handle data threshold limits, and how to identify and fix issues affecting report performance and accessibility.

=== Localizing Reports 234 ===
To localize a Visual Analytics report is to add translations of report attributes to accommodate users in multiple languages. A report can have multiple localizations and the users' browser locale setting dictates which attributes are returned.
Report attributes available for localization include object titles, tooltips, and other descriptive text that is part of your report. Exceptions include the following: the name of the report, the names of the reference lines that are associated with a graph, the currency format, which is based on the data source locale of the original report, the sort order, which is based on the data source locale of the original report, rich text that contains frequent or elaborate style changes or line breaks, the values of a custom group (but not the group name itself, which appears as a column heading).
The key thing to keep in mind is that you cannot translate the data stored in CAS, but the report attributes of objects.
Here is the interactive user interface to localize report text. You can use the save and copy buttons to either directly download the text file or to copy the contents to paste into the editor of your choosing.
You can see the ISO 693 two-letter language code and two-letter country code used to identify the translated text. This will match the selected locales in the browser settings. Next, make the translation edits in the text editor then use the browse and save buttons to associate this localization to the report. Using the save and browse is similar to export/import functionality and is handy when using translation tools or Generative AI to convert the text to different languages.
If you want to automate the translation process further, you can use the SAS Viya CLI to export the report. After installing sas-viya cli and the required modules. You can export the report translation files. It will generate a text which will be similar to the one exported from the user interface. At the top of the file, you have locale of the file and then each line represents an element in the report and its label. You can use a translation tool or generative AI to translate the different strings. After translation the files can be imported.
A good practice is to use a naming convention for translation files. When a report contains more than two languages, you can include the ISO 639 two-letter language code as a suffix to the file name. To further distinguish a localization for a country or region, you can include the ISO 3166 two-letter country code.

=== Managing Reports 050 ===
Managing reports can range from a wide variety of topics. We will not cover all of the possible administration features but focus on the topics that are important for report designers to know.
We will cover the different auto-save and recovery options available when saving reports.
There is also a feature to localize a report to serve multiple browser locales.
The analytic engine, CAS, can process large amounts of data, however; each Visual Analytics object has a limit to which it can display in the browser. This is called a threshold, and since the data is being sent to Visual Analytics which is a CAS client, it is called a client-side threshold or data limit. We will talk about how to adjust those options.
Last, there is also a Visual Analytics feature to analyze a report and take action to improve report performance.

=== Modifying Threshold and Data Limit Options 357 ===
A threshold and data limit is a number that limits the amount of data that can be visually displayed. Depending on the object, this number can represent detailed data rows, such as the scatter plot, or aggregated rows, such as the list table object. This number is controlled by the maxRowsLookup property. This option can be set at two different levels, either at a single use object level override or at the environment level which means that for every user that uses that report object, the new threshold number will be used.
The missing values option determines if missing values are included in the distinct count calculation. By default, missing values are included. This is controlled by the ignoreMissingValuesInDistinctCount property. This can only be changed at the environment level. This means every user, and every Visual Analytics report will calculate the Distinct Count the same.
A client-side threshold is the amount of data that CAS will send in the response to the client--in this case, Visual Analytics.
When you create an object in Visual Analytics, the client will send a request to CAS. CAS, similar to a data warehouse, contains all the data. The analytic engines summarize the data based on the object, the roles assigned, and any filters or ranks applied. After summarization is complete, the analytic engines limit the number of aggregated rows based on the object's client-side threshold and sends the aggregated result back to the client.
Let's consider an example. Suppose you would like to display a list of all your customers in a table. You have 68,300 customers, but the default client-side threshold for list tables is 40,000 rows. This means that the list table will display only 40,000 rows. If a total is included, this row counts as one of the 40,000.
To see all customers, you can modify the Override system data limit option to 70,000. In this case, all customers will be displayed in the list table.
Notice that even when the list table truncates the rows due to the client-side threshold, the totals are still accurate and based on all the data.
In most cases, it is better to only change the data limit for a specific object in a specific report. As a report author, you can override the system data limit using the Options pane of an object. While this modification can impact the performance of the report and the CAS server, the impact will be contained to this one object for this one report. You don't need administrative rights to change this value, having the right to edit the report is enough.
To edit environment level properties, you must be an administrator and have access to SAS Environment Manager. These properties are under the Configuration pane and on the definitions tab you can search for the sas.reportdata.properties.
There an administrator can edit the configuration properties for an existing object or create a new configuration if one is not listed for the object by default. The threshold values are controlled by the maxRowsLookup property. Modifying these configuration properties will impact all instances of the object in the environment and can directly impact performance. Before making changes, ensure that the changes are necessary and that they will not adversely impact your environment.
Similar to the environment level threshold data configuration, the property that controls whether or not to count missing values in the Distinct Count calculation needs to be done by an administrator in SAS Environment Manager.
On the Configuration pane, use the definitions tab and search for sas.reportdata.properties. Then search for the ignoreMissingValuesInCountDistinct property. This property is a toggle, by default the missing values are included in the calculation so only toggle it on if you want to ignore missing values. Remember, this is an environment level option and applies to all users for all Distinct Count calculations.

=== Report Review Pane 300 ===
To proactively troubleshoot reports, the Report Review pane analyzes the report and categorizes findings with recommendations to help improve report performance and accessibility compliance.
The Report Review pane provides you with a description of each issue and offers suggestions for improvements that you can make to your report or to the data that your report uses. The pane also checks for accessibility issues, which can impact users with color-deficient vision (color blindness) or other visual impairments.
The issues are classified by level from High to Low.
Some issues in a report can be detected only when SAS Visual Analytics analyzes the report loading time. For example, a slow report-loading time or a long data loading time might be detected.
Each issue is described by a type. An explanation is provided in the form of a text. And finally, the list of impacted variables. If you need to record the report review analyses to share it with others or to keep track of improvements, you can export the report review as PDF.
The Report Review analysis has over ten issue types it analyzes, depending on the elements in the report. Each issue type has the low, medium, and high criteria. Here are some examples of the issue types, their criteria, and possible actions you can take to improve the report design and/or performance.
Data-Loading in Seconds - A loading time of three seconds might be perceived by report viewers as slow. A loading time of longer than seven seconds might cause report viewers to think that the report is not working. Consider removing objects that take a long time to load to improve the report's performance. For example, to eliminate high priority issues, remove objects in your report that take longer than nineteen seconds to load.
Data Source count - The number of data sources in a report can impact performance. Nine or more data sources is considered a high issue. Reports with three or fewer data sources can keep your report from covering too many topics. Consider no more than six data sources per report.
Nested Containers - The layout of the report can also impact performance. If your report contains nested containers, consider adjusting your layout to avoid nested containers to improve the report's performance.
Report Loading in Seconds - If your report takes a long time to load and render the first page you should consider making the recommended improvements. A loading time of longer than twenty-five seconds might cause report viewers to believe that the report is not working.
If SAS Visual Analytics identifies performance issues other than slow loading times, fix those issues first. If no other performance issues are identified, contact your administrator to determine whether other factors are impacting your report. For example, a slow connection can cause a report to load slowly.
These are a few examples. You can find a full list of the messages and their related thresholds under Report Review Pane reference in the documentation.

=== Saving Reports 156 ===
Visual Analytics allows you to save a report, create a copy of a report, restore a report to an automatically saved point, which allows multiple report designers to work collaboratively.
After editing a report, you have two options to save it. While save as will create a copy of the report with a new name, the save option will create a new report or update the currently updated report.
Report names are limited to 100 characters and will not include leading or trailing spaces.
When you use the Save as option to save a copy of a report, any existing report distributions are not saved with the copy. If the original report has alert notifications for display rules, the alert conditions are copied, but the recipients are not.
In all cases, you need to have the permissions to add objects to the target folder.
When you try to save a report that has been updated by another user while you were editing it, you will be prompted that saving will overwrite the changes performed by the other user. A good practice is to use the Save as functionality to create a copy of the report and then to check the differences between the two versions.
If a report contains unsaved changes performed by yourself when you connect to Visual Analytics, the report state from the previous session can be restored. You can as a report developer recover your work and save the changes that would otherwise be lost. This is useful in case of disconnection due to timeout, browser crash or when you accidentally close the Visual Analytics tab of your browser.
The same logic applies when you open a report which contains unsaved changes. If your session is interrupted when you have unsaved changes and another user has made changes in the same report, then you can choose to use either your latest (autosaved) version of the report or to open the updated report that contains the other user's changes. If you choose to open the report with the other user's updates, your changes are discarded.

=== Sharing and Managing Reports 043 ===
You have many ways to share reports in Visual Analytics. In an offline capacity, you can export reports, data, and even save images of objects. You can also set up report distribution to a list of email recipients and send email alerts when objects fall below or exceed defined criteria.
In an online capacity, that is when users are logged into the SAS Viya environment, you can share the report with selected users, allow users to view selected reports as a guest where the viewer does not need to provide log on credentials, copy a link to the report, pages, or individual objects or copy the embeddable markup code to the report, pages, or individual objects for use in a custom web application.

=== Sharing Reports 752 ===
In an online capacity, you can share reports within the SAS Viya environment and a banner notification will be sent to the user. There are also SAS Content folders that will store the content that is shared with you or that you have shared with others.
Guest Access is an optional feature that allows anonymous read-only access to select resources with limited functionality.
The copy link to report feature is another online way to share reports. Similar to other technologies, you can copy the link to the report and then either email that link or paste it in a chat window. The copy link feature can be done at the report level, page level, or individual objects. The copy link is an interactive link with options to include application banners, parameters, etc.
The copy embeddable markup feature generates a code snippet for a report, page, or individual object for use in the SAS Viya SDK for JavaScript to embed content in a custom web page.
You can share reports directly with a recipient list. The ability to share a report depends on how the SAS Viya environment is configured at your site. By default, you can share reports that are in My Folder and reports that have been shared with you. If sharing is not available for a report, contact your system administrator.
If your report viewers wish to change object types, add data labels, or substitute data roles, then use the report's Viewer Capabilities option to allow for this type of functionality.
The user with whom the report is shared receives a notification through the alerting system. A notification badge in the application bar indicates the number of notifications received. When you click on the number more information about the notifications appears. You can leave the notification or delete it.
Here is an example of a report that has been shared with the user. It appears in the "Shared with Me" folder on the SAS Visual Analytics landing page and SAS Environment Manager.
The share ability depends on how the SAS Viya platform is configured.
By default, you can share reports that are in My Folder and reports that have been shared with you.
Report data must be available for Read access.
Guest Access provides anonymous Read-Only access to reports.
Guest is an internal user to the SAS Viya environment.
In order to enable guest access, an administrator must create a new configuration in SAS Environment Manager for the sas.logon.provider.guest definition.
Then an administrator with superuser privileges can use the CLI (command-line interface) to modify the authorization rules to grant read access to the desired CAS libraries.
Lastly, the administrator must configure read access to the SAS Content folders and reports for the guest user.
An administrator can use SAS Environment Manager to create and enable a new configuration instance for the sas.logon.provider.guest definition.
An administrator with superuser privileges can use the CLI to grant the guest user read access to the CAS libraries so they can view the data in the reports.
Next, the administrator can use the CLI or SAS Environment Manager to grant read and read (convey) to desired SAS Content folders and reports. It is recommended to create a folder at the top SAS Content level to grant access to the guest user, or you can use Public. This keeps the authorization rules easy and straight forward where the administrator can grant read, which provides access to the folder level, and read (convey), which grants read access to all the folder contents.
As a more complicated example, if you wanted to grant the guest user access to the sample reports, the administrator will need to create an authorization rule with a grant on read but a conditional grant on the read (convey).
The conditional grant will be on the Products folder for the read (convey), that is the permission to read the folder contents. To get the folder's URI, unique resource identifier, select the folder, SAS Visual Analytics, then expand the URI group and copy the path name. Then in the conditional grant, define the condition such that if the URI equals the SAS Visual Analytics folder, then the guest can view the folder contents.
This authorization gives guest the ability to read the Products folder, but only the folder contents, Read (convey), if the URI equals the SAS Visual Analytics folder.
2
Here is what the Visual Analytics landing page looks like when Guest signs in. Guest can see both the Products and Public folders, and the reports in each folder. The guest user has limited features and functionality such as: no saved report state, so the report will look the same for every guest user when they open the report, guests cannot share a report with other users, and guests cannot edit reports.
Notice that guests do not have the ability to switch applications as the application switching menu is disabled.
The guest user is not a typical user and will not be visible with the other users in SAS Environment Manager. Recall that the guest user is enabled by creating a new configuration instance.
When considering to enable guest access in your environment remember that it requires an administrator to enable, data must be in CAS libraries with guest access granted by a superuser, folders and reports must be granted read and/or read (convey), and all guests will have access to granted data so be sure to limit any sensitive data.
Another technique to share a report or specific object is to copy link. A link is automatically generated to the report, page, or object.
What will the users see when they get the link?
If the recipient has already signed in to SAS, the report appears when the report link is clicked.
If the recipient is not signed in to SAS, they are prompted for credentials or they can use the Guest button if Guest Access has been deployed and enabled. Then the report is opened.
If the recipient taps the link on an iOS or Android mobile device, then the report appears in the SAS Visual Analytics App if it is installed on the device. If the recipient taps the link on a Windows mobile device, then the report/object appears in the report viewing interface of SAS Visual Analytics.
The copy link user interface allows you to customize the link.
Only those who have permissions to view the report can open it and you are able to manage the permissions directly.
Other options to customize the link are to include guest access.
Generate an interactive report or static image.
Optionally include the application banner, menu bar, and/or page navigation.
You can also pass parameters values in the link so that when the user clicks on the link the parameter value is already populated.
You can paste this link into an email or chat window to share!
Another technique to share a report, page or specific object is to copy the embeddable markup to use in a custom web page.
A code snippet is automatically generated with HTML tags and report specifics to embed in SAS Viya SDK for JavaScript.
The custom web page must handle authentication to the SAS Viya environment, otherwise, if using object level tags, each report object will display a sign in screen.
Since the user must sign in to SAS Viya, when interacting with reports, pages, and objects in the same origin (URL and port) they will use the same session and retain settings.
The copy embeddable markup user interface allows you to customize the code.
Only those who have permissions to view the report can open it and you are able to manage the permissions directly.
Other options to customize the code are to include guest access.
Generate an interactive report (SDK element) or static image if disabled.
These are the embeddable markup examples for the report page and report object for use with the SAS Viya SDK for JavaScript to create custom web applications.

=== Viewer Capabilities 327 ===
The Viewer Capabilities option, in the Options pane at the report level, controls the customizations that can be made by the report viewer. This option can be set to simple edits, comprehensive edits (the default), or data edits. Each of the levels are additive, meaning that comprehensive edits include capabilities for simple edits and data edits include capabilities for comprehensive edits and simple edits.
NOTE: The Viewer Capabilities option was introduced in SAS Visual Analytics 8.4.
The simple edits level enables report viewers to make small changes to the report that do not change the original intent of the report. For example, report viewers can change how the data is sorted in an object and specify simple options for the object (like showing data labels and legends and modifying the grouping style).
Comprehensive edits, the default level, enables report viewers to make changes to the report that might alter the original intent of the report. For example, report viewers can change object types. This level also includes all the capabilities provided with simple edits.
The data edits level enables report viewers to change the data for objects in the report. This option setting gives report viewers almost full control of the report. For example, report viewers can change data assignments, filters, and ranks for objects. This level also includes all the capabilities provided with comprehensive edits.
When setting the Viewer Capabilities option, there are some things to consider.
Recall that this option is assigned at the report level, meaning that these capabilities cannot be assigned by user or by group. If you want to apply different levels to the same report for various users or groups, you must save the report for each user or group and then grant access as appropriate. This means that when you update the report, you must remember to update all the copies saved.
Viewer Capabilities cannot be assigned through the command-line interface (CLI).
In addition, if your data set contains personally identifiable information, you need to be very careful about setting the Viewer Capabilities level to data edits because it might be possible for viewers to use the sensitive information in the report.
However, you can control which data items are available to viewers by hiding data items in the Data pane.
In addition, you can choose to enable data exports, disable them if private data is present, or always disable them. Note that this applies when viewing the report, not while editing it.
Enabling data exports will allow exporting data, detail data, Microsoft Excel worksheets, images, PDF files and report packages. You can choose to disable some of these export destinations. Alternatively, you can choose to disable exports only when private data is present. Again, you can choose which export destinations to disable.
If a report contains private data, then exporting the report to PDF, as well as exporting the report package are disabled. Similarly, exporting a page to PDF is disabled if that page contains private data. Exporting object data, images or PDF are disabled if that object contains private data. Exporting detail data from an object may be disabled if the data source contains data items that are private, even if these data items are not used in that object, as the additional columns could enable a user to infer private data. Lastly, you can choose to enable all exports.

=== Advanced Layouts 145 ===
There are a few ways to further customize graph templates. You can place one graph element on top of another, creating an overlay. You can also add graph elements across multiple cells, creating a user-defined lattice. Finally, you can create a data-driven lattice, where the cells' data is driven by the value of one (or more) of the class variables.
In an overlay, one graph element is superimposed on another graph element in the same cell graph. Note that not all graph elements are compatible with one another. For example, pie charts and treemaps cannot be added to any overlay.
If the graph elements are compatible, they are automatically assigned a shared role. This enables both graph elements to have a common X-axis role.
When a graph template contains more than one cell, the cells are arranged in rows and columns called a user-defined lattice. Each cell is independent and contains whatever graph element you choose. However, you can use shared roles if you want multiple elements to display the same data. The rows and columns are automatically sized when you drag and drop a new element to add it to the canvas, but you can manually resize them if you wish.
A data-driven lattice is a multi-cell graph in which the cell data is determined by the values of one or more class variables, specified by the report designer. The number of cells is determined by the unique values of the class variables. Each cell of the lattice has the same graph elements, but each cell represents a different value of the class variable. For example, the Data-Driven Lattice Row creates multiple line charts -- one for each value of the data item assigned to it. You can define both a data-driven lattice row and a data-driven lattice column.

=== Creating Custom Templates 402 ===
To design a custom graph template, you can follow five basic steps: select the graph elements you want to use, create a layout either by overlaying multiple elements in the same cell or using a lattice of cells, configure the roles for each element, make adjustments to the appearance and options of each element, and then save and use the template.
In Graph Builder, you can build a graph template using graph elements, each of which is a way to visually represent data. There are many different graph elements that you can choose from: Bar Charts, Band Plots, Bubble Plots, Contour Plots, Line Charts, Geo Maps, Region Plots, Needle Plots, Pie Charts, Line Charts, Scatter Plots, Schedule Charts, Series Plots, Step Plots, Time Series Plots, Treemaps, Vector Plots, and Waterfall Charts.
A graph template or object consists of one or more graph elements. They can be combined and arranged using cells -- rectangular regions within the graph object that contain a graph element. Cells are identified by a combination of a letter and a number, where letters identify columns and the numbers identify rows. The cell for the first element is designated as A1.
The SAS Graph Builder interface looks similar to the Visual Analytics interface.
On the left pane, there is the Elements tab, where you select the graph elements you want to add to the template. The left pane also has the Outline tab, where you can move elements between cells or select an element to make it active for customizations.
On the right pane, there are the Options and Roles tabs, where you can configure the roles, appearance, and options for each element. Finally, in the center of the screen is the canvas, where you can preview the template.
Once you have added the graph elements you want, the next step is to use the left pane to configure the roles and options for the graph template. Each element has a set of roles that are required, but you can add additional roles and modify their properties. For example, the pie chart element has two required roles: Category and Response. However, you can add additional roles, such as Group and Data Tip. You can also specify the name of the role, what classification of data item must be assigned, and whether or not it is required.
If you want multiple graph elements in the template to use the same data item, you can also create shared roles. For example, you could use a shared role to make sure that a pie chart and bar chart used the same category data item.
Each element also has a set of options that you can use to control its appearance. Much like in Visual Analytics, options can be applied at a variety of levels: the entire template, a particular cell, an element within a cell, and for the X and Y axis of each cell, if applicable. Options can also be applied to the legend.
You can control a wide range of options, including text style, legend placement, axis direction, axis minimum and maximum values, transparency, and more.
Options are element-specific. For example, the bubble plot allows you to specify the Y axis direction, the size for the smallest and largest bubble, the transparency, and the fill color. For more information about the options available for each element, see the Working with Options documentation in the SAS Graph Builder User's Guide.
To use a custom graph in Visual Analytics, you must first save and import it. Import custom graphs in Visual Analytics from the Objects pane. Custom graphs must be imported manually. This does not happen automatically. Each user must import the custom graph to use it in a report. If you modify the graph template, it does not automatically update - you must reimport it. Report viewers do not need to import the custom graph to view reports that use custom graphs.
To collaborate on a custom graph, save it to a shared location, such as the Public folder or another shared team folder.

=== Introducing SAS Graph Builder 049 ===
If the out-of-the-box objects in Visual Analytics do not meet your needs: SAS Graph Builder enables you to create your own custom graph and map templates. You can drag and drop individual graph elements, configure what data roles are available, specify visual elements and options to create purpose-built graphs, and import these custom graphs for use in Visual Analytics reports.
Graph Builder is accessible from the applications menu. It is available to all users. When creating a graph, you have two options: build a new graph from scratch, or begin with a template from the Graph Gallery. The Graph Gallery contains predefined graph options that you can customize to create a new template.
All of the options in the Graph Gallery are objects already available in Visual Analytics.

=== Lesson Overview 034 ===
Although SAS Visual Analytics has many graph objects out-of-the-box, there may be occasions when you need a specific object or combination of objects that is not available.
Not to fear - in these cases, you can use the SAS Graph Builder to design your own purpose-built graph objects.
In this lesson, you'll learn how to use SAS Graph Builder to design and build custom graph templates.
You'll learn about the different graph elements that are available, how to create customizable layouts, and how to incorporate those custom graph objects in SAS Visual Analytics reports.

=== Data Requirements and Examples 250 ===
To create a path analysis object, the data source must have one row for each identifier-event pair.
The event role takes a category data item and represents the different nodes in the diagram. The events could be the pages of a website, the courses that a student takes, or the steps in the drug approval process.
The sequence order needs a measure or date/datetime data item that orders the events. This sequence order value determines the order of events within any given path and could be at any granularity so long as the interval increases to indicate order and does not reset.
The transaction identifier can be either a category or measure data item which is a value that uniquely labels each person or object that we would like to analyze. The identifier could be a unique visitor to the website, a single student or customer, or a specific drug code.
Optionally, you can have weight which requires a measure data item that determines the link width for the object. This measure must be a positive number not equal to zero. If any paths do not have a value greater than zero, they are hidden in the path analysis object.
In this example, the id column is the transaction identifier for each unique visitor to the website, the time column is the sequence order, the Grouped Pages column is the event, which is the name of the webpage they visit, and the purchase column is the optional link width. When we look at only customers who have made a purchase, each link is sized by the purchase amount for that specific identifier.
Take another look at the time column and its values: 100, 110, 111, 120, 121. These values have no real meaning or relationship to time but represent an ordinal value that simply orders the events for each unique visitor.
In this example, we have a list of classes each student attended. The Student ID column is the transaction identifier for each unique student, the Event Delivered (End) Date column is the sequence order, the Product Code column, which represents the course taken, is the event, and the frequency column is the link width.
Another example is looking at customer attrition, or customer churn, for a fictional internet service provider. In this example, we see all the paths that lead to a cancellation. Notice that most cancellations start with an outage.
Lastly, we can analyze the drug approval process for a pharmaceutical company. In this case, there is one main path. New drugs must go through a rigorous set of steps before they can be brought to the market. For this company, it seems like steps 1 and 2 (animal testing and the IND application) cause the most problems. We can use this information to refine our process so that more drugs reach the approval step.

=== Data Requirements and Options 418 ===
The document collection is a category which contains the text that you wish to analyze. Text topics also requires a unique row identifier. If your data source contains one unique identifier, SAS will automatically detect and assign it to the object. When there are multiple candidates for the unique identifier role, you must assign a data item manually. You must select the language of your documents. You can assign multiple data items to the document details role. These data items will be displayed as columns in the Documents table.
SAS provides several parsing options that you can customize when you set the term parsing and role identification option to Custom.
With include parts of speech checked, SAS will identify the part of speech of each word. For example, train can be a noun or a verb. These will be considered different terms.
You can choose to identify groups of terms being used as a noun, such as SAS Institute. Note that these terms might also appear on their own.
You can decide to identify text entities such as names, addresses, telephone numbers, and so on. By default, this option is off.
The stem terms option allows all forms of a given word to be considered as the same term. Stemmed words are prefixed with a plus sign in the topic. For example, dropped and drop are different forms of the same word and you would see drop in the topic.
A stop list can be crucial to remove common words that add little value to topic discovery, such as conjunctions and personal pronouns. SAS provides this stop list for each language.
Lastly, you can specify the minimum number of documents a term must appear in to be considered in the analysis.
There are several topic discovery options that allow for customization.
Maximum topics limits the number of topics to be created. You can choose a number between 2 and 25.
Cell weight can be none or logarithmic and term weight can be none or entropy. These will be explained on the next slide.
The number of terms to use in the labels limits the words used to represent each topic. Each topic actually contains many words; however, only the most important terms are displayed in the topics bar chart. You can choose between 2 and 8 terms to display to represent each topic.
To discover the topics from the parsed terms, a matrix with the frequencies of each term in each document is created. These frequencies can be weighted. Weights affect both topic creation and importance of terms within a topic. The idea behind weighting terms is to avoid more frequent terms from obscuring less frequent but more informative terms. According to Zipf's law, the most common word occurs approximately twice as often as the next common one.
The weight applied is the product of the cell weight and term weight. The cell weight is calculated for each document. The term weight is applied based on the distribution of the term across the whole document collection.
You can choose to not apply a cell weight. The other option is to use logarithmic cell weight, which reduces the importance of high-frequency terms in each document. A rule of thumb is to use a cell weight of None for short documents without too many repetitive words, where Zipf's law plays a smaller role. For term weight, you can choose between weighting terms by their frequency in the document collection, or weighting by entropy. Entropy can give a higher weight to more uncommon terms if they help distinguish between documents. It is recommended to use a stop list when applying term weight based on entropy. Note these are just rules of thumb. Experiment with different weights and select those that produce the best results for your document collection.
In the model display section, you can choose between several visuals to display, and the plot layout. The default plot layout Fit puts all visuals on the same page. For smaller screens, it is recommended to use the Stack plot layout, which puts the visuals in different tabs.
You can also abbreviate numeric values and specify the fields to display in the object header.
There are options to hide legends for text topics and text terms.
You can also specify the minimum relevance value for a document to be displayed when a topic is selected and choose to hide documents with a positive, neutral or negative sentiment if sentiment analysis is enabled.

=== Decision Tree 735 ===
A decision tree is an explainable and powerful machine learning algorithm that can be used for both classification and regression tasks and uses the C4.5 algorithm, an iterative dichotomizer. Classification refers to predicting a group to which an observation belongs, such as flower species. Regression refers to predicting a continuous numerical value, such as housing price.
By learning from the data, a decision tree iteratively creates a set of decision rules to accurately predict the response variable. The resulting decision rules can be plotted in the form of an inverted tree. Starting from the root at the top, each branch represents an IF-THEN decision rule, and each node represents an outcome. The terminal nodes of the tree are called leaves.
Using criteria such as entropy and information gain, the decision tree automatically selects the most relevant predictor variables influencing the response variable and the optimal splitting points to determine each decision rule.
A base decision tree is included with a SAS Visual Analytics license. In this chapter, base decision tree functionality is marked as such. With a SAS Visual Statistics license, you have access to an advanced decision tree object, where you can see the importance of each predictor variable in the model and various assessment plots to evaluate the model performance.
Statistics starts with data. Think of the data as being generated by what you are studying, these input variables called predictors go in one side, and on the other side, the response variables come out. The response variable is often also called the target. Decision trees are considered white box models because their structure is easily visualized, the decision-making process is transparent and easily understandable. The Decision Tree will determine the relationship of the input variables to response variables.
There are two goals in analyzing the data: explanation and prediction.
Explanation (or explanatory analysis) is the extraction of some information about how nature associates the response variables to the input variables.
Prediction (or predictive modeling) refers to predicting the responses for new data.
The base functionality provided by the Visual Analytics license only supports explanation.
In this chapter, you will build a decision tree to classify Iris flowers. There are three species of Iris Flowers: Setosa, Versicolor and Virginica. They can be characterized by the width and lengths of their petals and sepals.
The first step to creating a decision tree is selecting a response variable. This is the outcome variable you want to predict or explain. It can be a measure or a category. For categorical response variables, you need to select an event level. This is one of the category values that you want to predict. This is necessary for creating the correct assessment statistics.
For example, we may want to predict which flowers are Setosa.
Next, we need to select predictors. These are variables that can help predict or explain the response variable. Decision trees automatically select the most relevant predictors. Note that, like other machine learning algorithms, decision trees' predictive power decreases with a higher number of predictors.
The response and predictor data items make up our input data.
Next, the model then trains on the data, learning the data's features to create a set of decision rules and build the tree.
You may be interested in what distinguishes Iris species out of curiosity, or to apply this knowledge offline. The explanation, how is the response variable related to the predictors would pose the question: how does petal length and width determine the flower type?
You can use the mouse wheel or pinch out with two fingers on your laptop trackpad to zoom in on the decision tree and explore how the predictor variables affect the response variable. By zooming in on a node, you can see how many observations from each response level fall into that node.
Each branch of the tree displays the name of the predictor for the branch at the top of the split. The thickness of the branch indicates the number of observations that are associated with each node. The predictor values for each node are displayed above the node.
The bar chart in each node displays the values of the response data item that are selected by the splits in the tree.
If the response is continuous data then the response is binned. In that case you will see a histogram instead of bar chart and standard deviations on each node.
You can right-click on the decision tree to change the displayed statistic to percent. You can also derive the leaf ID as a new data item.
You can also use your decision tree model for prediction. In this case, you will score new data using the model. For example, you could use this model to predict the species of new Iris flowers.
For scoring, the model is first translated into another format called score code. In the SAS Viya environment, score code is a SAS program that you can easily run on a scoring data set. SAS Viya creates two types of SAS language score code: either DATA step code or analytic store (ASTORE) code. Then, the model is applied to the scoring data set to obtain predicted outcomes, as well as probabilities for the target event level, or all event levels. The resulting dataset is generally known as scored data. Based on the predictions from the model, the enterprise makes business decisions and acts.
With a categorical response variable, the model produces a probability that the event level is reached. For example, the model might state there is a 50% probability that a given flower is Setosa. Would you classify this as Setosa or not? The choice you make will influence the number of false positives and false negatives.
In the decision tree options, you can set a prediction cutoff, which is the probability from which we consider that the outcome occurs.
Let us consider an example where there are only two outcome levels: Setosa and Virginica. The event level we chose to model is Virginica.
In the training data, 0% of flowers with a petal width of less than 6 millimeters are Virginica. Of flowers with a petal width of more than 6 millimeters, 98% are Virginica. Let us score some data using this model.
The first flower in the scoring data has a petal width of 2 millimeters. It falls under the leaf on the left, where there is a 0% probability that it is Virginica. The second flower has a petal width of 18. It falls under the right leaf, where 98% of flowers were Virginica. As this is above the prediction cutoff of 0%, this flower is classified as Virginica.
Imagine you are a teacher that wants to assess your students' understanding of algebra. You will give them questions to practice. Typically, the questions in the exam will be different. Otherwise, they might memorize the solutions to the practice questions, but you will not know how well they answer new questions. In the machine learning world, this is known as overfitting. To get an honest assessment of a model's performance, the data is split into a training and validation partition. The training partition (usually 70% or 80% of the input data) is used to build the model. The model is then run on the validation dataset. The model's predictions in the validation dataset are compared to the observed outcomes to get an honest assessment of the model's performance.

=== Decision Tree Data Roles and Options 350 ===
Two data roles are mandatory when creating a decision tree. The response variable is the variable you want to explain or predict. The predictors are the variables that help explain or predict the response. Both can be categories, measures or geographies.
These are the roles available with the base functionality in Visual Analytics.
If you have Visual Statistics, there is another role available, partition ID. If you want to do an honest assessment of a model's performance, you can create a Partition data item in the data menu, which you can assign to the Partition ID. You can optionally also assign a frequency, weight and node details.
In the decision tree options, if you have a categorical response, you can select the event level that you want to model. Model predictions and many assessment statistics, such as the False Positive Rate, lift and the ROC chart depend on the event level selected.
You can also customize the decision tree growth strategy. If you select Custom, you can specify many hyperparameters on the decision tree's structure. Read the SAS Help Center: Working with Decision Trees documentation for more information on the hyperparameters for each growth strategy.
With SAS Visual Statistics, you also have access to an additional growth strategy: modeling. Read the SAS Help Center: Working with Decision Trees documentation for more information on the hyperparameter values in this growth strategy.
Furthermore, with the autotuning option, SAS Viya will automatically search for the optimal values of these hyperparameters based on a metric that you can choose.
Choosing a custom growth strategy gives you extensive control over the structure of the decision tree. You can control the maximum number of branches created after every node, the maximum number of levels in the tree, and the minimum number of observations to create a leaf. Measure predictors need to be binned to be used in a decision tree. You can control the number of bins to create for measure predictors as well as the bin method. To mitigate overfitting, you can control the amount of pruning. Lastly, you can indicate whether predictors can be used multiple times to reach a leaf node.
SAS Visual Analytics gives you extensive control on how to handle missing values when training your decision tree.
You can choose none, which means missing values will be excluded from the model. Be careful with this option, as only observations with no missing values in any of the predictors can be used to train the data, which can potentially significantly reduce the size of your training data.
Alternatively, you can choose use in search which will use missing values in the decision rules. This makes sense if their missingness has a meaning in the data context. For example, in a dataset with exam scores, a missing value means a student missed that exam.
The option to use as machine smallest means the decision tree can treat missing values as the smallest possible value.
The option to use popular means observations with missing values can be assigned to the leaf with the most observations.
The option to use similar means the missing value can be assigned to the leaf deemed most similar by chi-square test (for category responses) or F-test (for measure responses).
The minimum value represents the number of observations that are allowed to have missing values before missing values are treated as a distinct category level.
We can change the plot layout from fit to stack to get each piece of output on a separate tab.
This is the optimal setting if you have a small screen.
You can choose which assessment statistic is displayed at the top of the decision tree. The assessment statistic you choose depends on your modeling goals. See SAS Help Center: Modeling Information for a full list with explanations of the assessment statistics available.

=== Decision Tree Results 406 ===
In a decision tree object, you can see the event level chosen, assessment statistic and the button to transfer the model to Model Studio at the top. Below, you can see the decision tree and icicle plot that come with the base functionality in Visual Analytics. The icicle plot is an alternative way of viewing the decision tree. The width of each item in the plot indicates what percentage of the data is contained in that item. The color of the node in the icicle plot indicates the predicted level for that node. When you select a node in either the decision tree or the icicle plot, the corresponding node is selected in the other location.
If you have SAS Visual Statistics, you will also see the variable importance plot and an assessment plot. The variable importance displays how important each predictor was when creating the decision rules.
The decision tree object with a categorical response provides a range of assessment plots that allow you to assess the model fit using different metrics.
Right-click on an assessment plot to choose to display another assessment plot.
The ROC and cutoff plot can help you find the optimal cutoff for a given sensitivity or specificity, allowing you to find the best balance between true positives and true negatives.
The lift plot shows how much added value the model provides for classification compared to randomly assigning an outcome to each observation.
The misclassification plot shows you the amount of correctly and wrongly classified flowers, always considering the target event level and prediction cutoff.
The confusion matrix displays correct classifications and misclassifications by outcome. For example, you can see that exactly 1 Setosa was misclassified as Virginica.
Note that when there are more than two outcomes in the response, the confusion matrix relies on the majority outcome in a leaf to classify an observation instead of the prediction cutoff.
For measure responses, the assessment plot displays the predicted and observed average in a graph. Note that for any assessment plot, you can click on the information button for an explanation.
Maximize the decision tree object for additional details about the decision tree and interpreting the results. When you maximize the object, the summary tabs appear under the object. You can click on the individual tabs or use the button to navigate to a specific tab. You can view the underlying data for the decision tree components and summary explanations. The available tabs will be dependent on your license.
You can right-click on the decision tree to enter interactive mode. Here, you can prune nodes to simplify the decision tree, mitigate overfitting and make the data more generalizable. You can also edit split rules of specific nodes, changing both the predictor and the split point used in the decision rule. This is especially useful if you have subject matter expertise. Lastly, you can grow the tree by creating a subtree using selected predictors from the leaves of the selected node.
SAS Visual Statistics provides much more functionality with the decision tree object.
One way of using the model to score data is to generate score code. You can generate DATA step and ASTORE score code. Refer to SAS Help Center: Common Modeling Tasks to see the code required to apply the score code onto a scoring dataset.
THE MODEL CAN CREATE NEW ITEMS: the predicted outcome and the probability of the event level, or of each outcome. These can be used in visualizations and to compare different versions of a model.
Note that when you choose to derive probabilities for all event levels, the prediction outcome does not take into account the event level and prediction cutoff.
Depending on your license, you can transfer your model to SAS Model Studio, where you can build advanced machine learning pipelines, use open-source models and score data without score code. If your model is ready to be used by others, you can register it. The model will then appear in SAS Model Manager, where you can evaluate model performance over time, govern the model and use the model to score data using a point-and-click interface.

=== Forecasting 435 ===
When forecasting is mentioned, most people think of sales forecasts or forecasts about the state of the economy. However, forecasts can be useful for any industry. They can help companies prepare for the future, show them how to be more efficient, help them understand how to better manage their inventory, or help them schedule their processes more effectively.
A forecasting object uses the statistical trends in your data source to predict future data values. Forecasting can be useful in any industry. Visual Analytics can evaluate additional measures to determine if they contribute to the forecast as an underlying factor. If a forecast is determined to have a contributing underlying factor, Visual Analytics provides What-If Analysis including What-If Scenario Analysis and What-If Goal-Seeking.
The forecast displays a line with predicted values and a colored band that represents the confidence interval. For example, a 95% confidence interval is the data range where the forecasting model is 95% confident what the future values will be.
Historical, or actual, values for the forecast model are displayed as markers only, without a line. Historical predicted values (hindcast) are displayed as part of the forecast line. Depending on the forecasting model that is selected, the historical prediction line might not begin at the start of the X axis.
To create a forecast in Visual Analytics, you need time series data. That means the rows of your table must represent data over some period of time (date, time, or datetime) and the columns of your table must contain at least one measure data item for forecasting.
The data can contain multiple rows for each date. In that case, the forecasted measure is aggregated for each date before forecasting is performed.
If your data contains multiple measures and you think some of those additional measures might contribute to the forecast, you can add them as possible underlying factors.
Visual Analytics automatically tests several forecasting models against your data ( ARIMA, damped-trend exponential smoothing, linear exponential smoothing, seasonal exponential smoothing, simple exponential smoothing, Winters method (additive), and Winters method (multiplicative)) and selects the best mode. The selected model can be viewed when in maximize mode on one of the results tabs.
SAS Visual Statistics and SAS Visual Data Mining and Machine Learning give you the added ability to create your own models instead of relying on the model that is automatically selected for forecasting. SAS Visual Forecasting, on the other hand, gives you the power to produce large-scale time series analyses and hierarchical forecasts.
Visual Analytics accounts for cyclical patterns by using standard intervals of time, such as 60 minutes in one hour, 24 hours in one day, and 12 months in one year. If your data uses nonstandard intervals, such as 48 thirty minute cycles in one day, then cyclical patterns are not considered in the forecast.
The forecast object offers options for the confidence interval. By default, the interval is set to 95% confidence, but this is customizable. You can also define the forecast horizon. The default is to project out 6 periods. The periods are dependent on the date data interval.
There is also an option for the time series binning interval. This specifies the interval between datetime values in the plot. The automatic option allows Visual Analytics to determine the best interval for the plot. The use format option plots all of the datetime values as rendered by the data format.
You can also specify whether the measures share a single response axis (Shared axis) or have separate response axes for each measure (Separate axes), under the measure layout option. If you select automatic, then the measure layout is determined automatically depending on the format and data range of the measure values.
Forecasts are very useful in planning for the future. For example, you can use a forecast to predict the number of storms for the next six years based on historical storm occurrence. You can also use a forecast to predict the number of injuries from motor vehicle accidents for a specific city.
In addition, forecasts can be used to determine production of electricity so that staffing and transport planning can be made according to spikes. Forecasts can also be used to predict future performance, either in terms of sales or the volume of stocks sold.

=== Lesson Overview 029 ===
In this lesson, you'll learn how to use a number of analytic objects. You'll explore how to use the forecasting object to predict future data values, how to look at relationships between data items with the network analysis object, and how to visualize flows of data from one event to another with the path analysis object.
You'll learn how to use the decision tree object to analyze your data and make predictions, as well as how to perform sentiment analysis with the text topics object.

=== Network Analysis 315 ===
Sometimes it seems everything is connected, events, relationships between people and places, data via transactions, even logistics. With advances in technology, it is now easier than ever to collect data about these connections and use that data to visualize a linked relationship. Network diagrams are a great way to look at this information.
One way to view the relationship between data is using a network analysis object. A network analysis object displays relationships by using a series of linked nodes that can have two structure types. The network analysis object also automatically calculates network metrics that can be used as either the size or color data roles. If you have geographic data items, you can also select to view the network analysis on a map background.
The network analysis object's data roles are controlled by the network structure general option. There are two types of network data structures that are supported, ungrouped and hierarchical.
An ungrouped network diagram creates a series of linked nodes from a source to a target. The nodes and links represent connections between those data values.
A hierarchical network diagram uses a defined arrangement of category data items which displays a parent-child relationship. It can show disconnected clusters of nodes depending on the underlying values.
The network analysis object also has a link type general option that can show either a directed or undirected connection.
A directed link type is a one-way connection. This link type affects the calculation of the network metrics.
An undirected link type is bidirectional and also affects the calculation of the network metrics.
Another important network analysis general option is the additional levels slider. This applies to hierarchical networks only and specifies the number of levels that are displayed beneath the current level of hierarchy.
The options pane is where you can really customize the network analytics object. In the network display option group, you can choose to abbreviate numeric values, add data labels, turn on link arrows, turn on detailed link attributes, and select a link curvature percentage.
To further customize the network analysis object, you can choose the node size percentage.
For the node selection group, you must have identified a source node from the diagram and then you have the ability to select the number of successors to display.
If your network structure data items are geographic, then you can choose to use a map background.
The network analysis object automatically calculates network metrics that can be used to further enhance your diagram. These automatically generated measures can only be used in either the size or color data roles.
The betweenness Centrality indicates how often a given node is part of the shortest path between nodes.
The closeness centrality indicates how close a node is to all of its connected nodes.
The reach centrality indicates how many links away the farthest connected link is.
The color data role supports two additional network metrics that are automatically created.
The community identifies local groups of nodes.
And the disconnected network ID identifies each group of connected nodes.

=== Network Analysis Data Requirements 147 ===
Now we will cover the required data structures for each type of network analysis diagram: ungrouped and hierarchy.
An ungrouped network diagram creates a series of linked nodes from a source to a target.
Let's look at an example.
The source column contains all the nodes for the plot and the target column creates the links between the nodes.
Here are additional ungrouped network structure examples that show the underlying data structure. Notice that every node must have a source value to be drawn in the diagram. In other words, all the target values must also be included in the source values.
Also notice that when the link type directed is used, the arrow is drawn from the source to the target. In the first example, notice that the arrow is pointing from the source value Target1A to the target value Node1. Then in the second example, see how the data must be structured differently just to get the arrows to point in the other direction.
In the last example, notice how the source includes two targets so that two arrows are drawn from the source node.
A hierarchical network diagram uses a hierarchy which specifies the nodes and links. It shows a parent-child relationship in which each parent node is linked only to its children. For this example, you can see that each product belongs to one product line. Typically, this type of network diagram shows disconnected clusters of nodes.
Here is an additional hierarchical network structure example. These two network diagrams use the same hierarchy and data role assignments, but the only difference is the additional levels option. The top of the hierarchy is the current level, and then as you expand the hierarchy the level increases. Notice how the same network diagram can be configured to look different by using the options pane.

=== Network Analysis Examples and Features 218 ===
Let's look at some additional network analysis examples and features such as the geographic map background and display rules.
For an ungrouped network diagram, if both the source and target nodes are geographic data items, then the network can be overlaid on a geo map.
This is very helpful for understanding how location affects the relationships in the network.
Consider airline and airport connections. Viewing the relationships on a geo map can change our analysis. For example, when viewing the ungrouped network diagram, there seemed to be some nodes that were not as connected as others (that is, at the edge of the network). This could give us the impression that these airports are not as popular as others in the network. However, viewing the same information on a geo map reveals that our impressions were incorrect. These airports are less centralized within Europe, which is contributing to their position in the network.
We can also look at the customer habits example overlaid on a geo map. Now we can see the actual locations of the stores in North Carolina. This can give us a better idea of which stores are direct competitors (the stores in Winston-Salem and Raleigh-Durham). And it uncovers locations for future expansion (the Outer Banks).
We can also use an ungrouped network diagram to see the path of storms. In this diagram we can see the storms for a selected year, wind speed, category of storm and its path.
In this hierarchy network diagram example, we have used display rules instead of the color role to highlight the data to identify and call attention to nodes that meet certain criteria. Notice how we have several expression-based display rules to highlight certain salary values. At the bottom, the first applied display rule is a color-mapped value category rule that has a defined icon but no color. Whereas the top color-mapped value rule defines both an icon and color.
Display rules are applied in order from bottom to top. You can drag the rules to reorder.
You can use network analysis objects in the traditional way to provide a visual diagnostic of your data and the relationships between values, but you can also use them together for comparison to quickly see changes in growth, coverage or impact. Just be conscious that the range of size and color are dynamic.

=== Path Analysis 345 ===
For some types of analysis, you might be interested in flows of data. This could be steps in a process, flows through different loyalty levels, flows through pages in a website, or flows through product packages. Often, you want to see which path leads to some goal, like completion or the purchase of a product.
The path analysis object displays flows of data. This type of diagram is also called a Sankey diagram. When the object is maximized, there is a natural language explanation on the path analysis summary tab, and there are several link and path boundary options available for customization.
Visualizing the flow of data from one state to another was first done in 1898 to show the energy efficiency of a steam engine. The diagram showed the flow starting from the boiler through to the steam pipes and then to the valves, cylinders, and pistons that propel the train. The width of the arrows through the diagram is proportional to the flow rate of the energy.
Modern application of the Sankey diagram takes us to the path analysis object. This diagram also displays the flow of data from one event to another as a series of paths and is not limited to any type of state change. Each event in the data is called a node. The width of the path link represents either frequency or you can assign a weight measure. Linked nodes represent consecutive events. This example shows customer visits to a website and what pages were clicked in what order and if any products were purchased.
Use the maximize button to view the path analysis details. There are two tabs, path information which shows the data that makes up the diagram and the path analysis summary tab. This contains a Visual Analytics-generated natural language explanation of the path analysis results.
Links can be colored to show each path in a different color, to show each event in a different color, or to indicate drop-offs (where one path ended, and other paths continued).
Coloring links by path, displays each path as a separate group with a distinct color. It is useful if you have a small number of paths and you would like to follow each separately.
Coloring links by event, colors each link according to the event that it represents. This makes it easier to visually compare the same event throughout the diagram.
Coloring links by drop-off, colors the links in the diagram based on whether they are drop-off links. This makes it easier to identify where paths frequently end.
Using the Options pane, you can customize the appearance of the path analysis object. In the previous slide, we saw how link color specifies the method that is used to group and color the paths in the diagram. The link width option specifies whether the width of a link in the path represents the path frequency or the aggregated value of the weight measure. The minimum and maximum path length specifies the length a path is displayed. The minimum and maximum frequency specifies the path frequency to be displayed. The path ranking direction specifies whether the ranking selects the top or bottom value. The path ranking count specifies the count for the path ranking. By default, the ranking selects the top or bottom 200 paths. When selected, the compress option combines repeated, consecutive events in each path into a single event.
You can also choose a horizontal or vertical layout. If you select to use abbreviated numeric values you can also select the scale: automatic, thousands, millions, etc. and the number of digits of precision. You can also select to enable node labels which displays the event names, link labels which displays the width value for each link, nodes which displays the link width values, and outline which displays a box around each node.

=== Text Topics 738 ===
When thinking about analyzing data, you usually think of structured tables in which data is organized into rows and columns. With text analytics, however, it is possible to analyze unstructured columns of text as well. The main use of text topics is to provide a high-level summary of "what people are talking about". This could be free-form data like text in comment fields, customer complaints, movie reviews, job descriptions, book summaries, or the contents of health records.
A text topics object analyzes unstructured data that is referred to as the document collection. The data source must contain a unique row identifier that needs to be defined before assigning roles to the text topics object. There is an option to perform sentiment analysis and Visual Analytics supports over thirty languages for text topics. The available languages will be dependent on your license and installation.
There are some terms you need to familiarize yourself with before moving on. The unique row identifier is a data item that has a unique value for every observation. SAS typically detects and assigns such a column automatically. If there are multiple unique row identifiers, you have to select which one to use for the text topics object. If there are no unique row identifiers in the data source, ask the person who created it to create one, perhaps by concatenating multiple data items. The unique row identifier is labeled with a key icon in the Data pane.
The document collection is the data item with the unstructured text you want to analyze. Each observation in the document collection is called a document.
The first step in text analytics is to parse the unstructured text and retrieve terms. Terms are words or phrases. SAS uses natural language processing to identify and distinguish words used as different parts of speech, such as train (as a verb) and train (as a noun). At the same time, SAS considers different forms of a word, such as run and running, as the same term. SAS can also identify entities and groups of terms used as a noun. These options can be switched off if you wish and are discussed further later.
Once SAS has parsed the text and extracted the terms, the extracted terms are compared to the stop list. Extracted terms are removed if they are on the stop list. The words on the stop list are usually commonly used terms that likely add no meaning. This includes, for example, conjunctions and personal pronouns. Thus, the stop list allows only meaningful terms to be analyzed by text topics. Each language has its own stop list. The stop list is supplied by SAS. Using a stop list is optional but recommended.
Next, SAS can finally derive topics, which are terms that often appear in the same documents. For example, the drop, risk, supplier, dissatisfy topic is found in documents where the terms drop, risk, supplier and dissatisfy, as well as other terms that are not displayed, are employed. A plus prefix in front of a term indicates that multiple forms of the term are included in the topic. For example, drop includes dropping and dropped. We can use this topic to identify documents where the order note mentions that the customers are dissatisfied and might drop us. To find topics, SAS creates a large matrix with possibly weighted frequencies of each term in each document. The resultant matrix goes through Singular Value Decomposition for dimensionality reduction. You can request to extract the top 2-25 topics.
Optionally, SAS can calculate the sentiment in each document. This functionality is optional but set to off by default as it is calculation heavy. Words are classified into negative, neutral, and positive sentiment. Negative words contribute a score of 0, neutral words contribute a score of 0.5, and positive words contribute a score of 1 to the average calculation for the document sentiment score. The number of documents with positive, neutral and negative sentiment are displayed for each topic.
The text topics results feature a bar chart visualizing the number of documents each topic appears in. If sentiment analysis is enabled, the bars are grouped by sentiment. On the right, you see a word cloud of terms sized by the number of documents they appear in. At the bottom, you see a list a of documents and the average sentiment in the document, if enabled. Any data items selected in the Document details role are displayed next to the documents. You can right-click or double-click on a document to view the full document. With a right-click, you can also select multiple documents and create a list table from them. When you select a topic in the topics bar chart, the terms word cloud and the documents table are filtered by that topic. Note that a document is only displayed in the documents table if it contains at least one of the most significant terms in the selected topic. Furthermore, the documents table displays the relevance of the selected topic for each displayed document.
After you have completed text analytics, you can derive data items to further analyze the topics that are generated. Derived data items can be created from topics and relevance.
For derived relevance, the value represents the relevance of the topic in that document.
For derived topics, the value is either 1 (if the topic is included in the document) or 0 (if the topic is not included in the document). You can use these derived items as a filter or with other data items for deeper insights.
Select the derived items you want created. The selected derived items are then available from the Data pane and can be used in a variety of objects for further analysis.
In this first example, we have added both the derived topic category and the derived relevance measure to a List table object. In this object it is easy to see which documents contain the topic because you will see the number one and a larger relevance for those observations. The relevance measure can be higher either because the documents uses more terms from the topic or because it uses terms that have a higher weight in that topic.
In a bar chart example, the derived topic category is used as the group role. Here it is easy to see that only the North American continent contains documents with the topic. You can then investigate deeper into this data.
The last example is using a heatmap object. This object uses the derived relevance measure, and we can see that the higher order totals show a low relevance to the complaints. This is a positive thing to see that, at least in this case, those higher order customers are not talking about dropping the supplier.
The text topics model can be converted into ASTORE score code. To do this, right-click anywhere in the text topics object and select Generate ASTORE code. This code can then be applied to a new document collection to determine topics and topic relevance in each document.
When you maximize the text topics object, you see three tabs. If you click on topics, you see the data behind the topics bar chart, including the total amount of documents, and the amount of negative, neutral and positive documents per topic. Note that the topic selected is also highlighted in the bar chart above. The terms tab displays the terms within the selected topic, including the weight of the term within topic. If no topic is selected, top terms by document count are shown. Each term's part of speech is displayed if the corresponding role identification option is turned on. Lastly, the text topics summary tab gives a natural language explanation of the results.

=== Underlying Factors and What-If Analysis 312 ===
When you create a forecast in Visual Analytics, the predicted values are based solely on historical trends in your data.
In some cases, you might be able to improve the forecast by adding underlying factors. These are additional measures that you think might help improve the accuracy of your forecast.
As you add these additional measures, Visual Analytics evaluates them to determine whether they contribute to the accuracy of the forecast. If the additional measures do not increase the accuracy, then they are not applied. If they do increase the accuracy, then the contributing measure is highlighted in the Roles pane, the measure is used to adjust the forecast and the confidence bands are narrowed, the measure is displayed as a separate line in the forecast, and the What-If analysis button is enabled.
After underlying factors are identified, you can then perform what-if analysis, which looks at changes in the forecasts based on changes in your data from new information. There are two types of what-if analysis that can be performed: scenario analysis and goal-seeking.
With scenario analysis, you modify future values of the underlying factors to see what impact those changes have on the forecast.
With goal-seeking, you modify the future values of the forecast to see what changes in the underlying factors are needed to reach that goal.
Let's look at an example for each. Starting with scenario analysis: our underlying factor will be what I eat for dinner. I decide to eat all my favorite foods, and I want to forecast what my future weight will be.
Now let's look at goal-seeking. Here, I start with my goal which is I want to forecast my current weight minus 10% and I want the forecast algorithm to tell me what the underlying factor, i.e. what I should eat for dinner, should be.
When the What-If button is enabled on the Forecast object, you can select either Scenario Analysis or Goal-Seeking.
Let's look at the Scenario Analysis interfaces. You can toggle between either the table or chart to modify the future values of the underlying factor measure. In the table interface, you will see the current forecasted value and can enter a new value. In the chart interface, you can drag the marker to the desired value. Once you have made your data value edits, be sure to click the apply button to rerun the forecast.
You can also use the adjust menu to apply an adjustment to all of the underlying factor values. There is also a reset option available to reset to the original values.
Now let's look at the Goal-Seeking interfaces. You can toggle between either the table or chart to modify the future values of the forecast measure. In the table interface, you will see the current forecasted value and can enter a new value. In the chart interface, you can drag the marker to the desired value. Once you've made your data value edits, be sure to click the apply button to rerun the forecast.
You can also use the adjust menu to apply an adjustment to all of the future forecast values. In goal-seeking, there is an additional option to set bounds for each underlying factor to limit the minimum and maximum values that are possible. There is also a reset option available to reset to the original values.

=== Accessibility Tips 401 ===
Let's discuss some additional tips to keep in mind when designing accessible reports.
    These can be split into recommendations for objects, like list tables, geomaps, and animated
    objects, tips for improving report navigation, and guidelines when working with actions.


    Avoid adding totals to list tables.
    In the web application, screen readers do not see the totals.
    If totals are important, use a key-value object or add a text object with dynamic text that
    displays the totals.
    For list tables, when you use gauge display rule, be sure to include the measure that
    the rule is based on in the list table.
    This avoids accessibility problems for screen reader users and for users with color-deficient
    vision who might not be able to distinguish the difference between the gauge colors.
    For geomaps, beware of the color role and the link color role for geonetwork objects.
    For measures, the gradient used to color the regions often blends in with the background
    map, which can make it difficult or impossible for a person with color blindness to pinpoint
    the data.
    For categories, the default colors are different but have similar luminosities.
    This can make it difficult for people with color blindness to distinguish the values.
    Modify the color choices to use those that differ from the background map and have different
    luminosity.
    In addition, panning and area-based selection in geomaps are not accessible to keyboard-only
    users or screen reader users.
    To ensure that those users can see all data presented in the map, verify that the zoom
    level is sufficient.
    Avoid geocontour maps because they are not accessible to screen reader users.
    If you need to use a geocontour map, present the same data with another, more accessible
    object, like a list table.
    When working with animated objects, set the animation speed to slow or medium.
    This avoids rapidly flashing content that can violate accessibility guidelines.


    When using text objects to display a title, make sure that you mark the text as one of
    the available heading styles.
    Screen readers can perceive the text as a heading, which helps make the report easier
    to navigate and understand.
    However, be aware that in the iOS app, voiceover users cannot perceive that text content with
    a heading style as a heading, but they can perceive that object titles are headings.
    It's always a best practice to specify descriptive text for objects.
    Visual analytics will identify an object using alternative text, if any is specified, the
    object's title and the object's name.
    Choose meaningful titles or names for your objects, or specify alternative text.
    Always provide context for graph content.
    If you remove access labels, provide a title or description that explains the data items
    used in the graph.
    In general, including access labels improves your reader's ability to understand graphs
    in your report.
    It's always best to provide information to users about accessibility features.
    For example, the Visual Analytics web application includes several keyboard shortcuts that are
    useful for keyboard-only users and users of screen readers.
    Consider providing links to the keyboard shortcuts in the SAS Visual Analytics, Accessibility
    Features Documentation.


    Provide using link selection actions.
    This includes link selection between objects and automatic link selection actions.
    Screen reader users cannot perceive that there is a link selection between objects or that
    data elements within a graph are highlighted via a link selection action.
    Use text objects to explain report actions.
    Visual Analytics does not automatically provide information to screen reader users about actions.
    Both screen reader and sighted users might not understand interactivity, so including
    some explanation will be helpful to everyone.
    In addition, try to avoid complex chains of report actions that are difficult to explain.
    This ensures that your reports are easier to use for everyone, regardless of ability.

=== Choose the Best Chart 1116 ===
In the next step, choose the best chart. You start drafting the report based on your sketch.
    How do you know which chart type to choose? It depends on the data that you want to display,
    character, numeric, date, and so on, and what you are trying to showcase.


    Ask yourself these six questions to choose the best chart type.
    Am I highlighting one important fact? Am I comparing two or more things?
    Am I showing survey or questionnaire results? Am I describing how the parts relate to the whole?
    Am I showing relationships between data items? Is a graph required?


    Am I highlighting one important fact? If so, you can use a key value object or
    dynamic text to highlight a single number, a donut chart to highlight a single percentage,
    or a faded bar chart that draws the viewer's attention to one value.


    For the pie chart and the bar chart, display rules are used to highlight important values.
    When doing this, take care to choose colors that are easily distinguished, especially for users who
    are color blind. You can test whether your color choices are accessible to users with
    color-deficient vision by changing your display to grayscale mode or printing the report in grayscale.


    In addition, when you use expression-based display rules, it's a best practice to
    specify a meaningful label for the display rule. This label appears in the display rules
    pane when viewing the report and in the toolkit for any elements to which the display rule applies.
    This label is also announced by screen readers in the Visual Analytics web application.


    Am I comparing two or more things? For general comparisons, use a bar chart to
    compare multiple pieces of data, a dot plot to compare groups with values close together,
    a butterfly chart to compare two groups across different categories, or a dual-axis chart to
    compare two measures with different ranges. However, be aware that some audiences might
    not be familiar with dual-axis charts and might misinterpret them. It might be better to show two
    single-axis graphs instead.


    Fixed-axis ranges can be useful for accessibility because they enable
    users of sonification to understand the scale of data that is shown in the object. This is
    especially useful when the values shown in the object can change due to filtering or drilling
    down in a hierarchy. However, if your data updates frequently or is likely to fall outside the range
    when filtering or drilling, a fixed-axis range is not recommended because values can unknowingly
    fall outside of the fixed range.


    Am I comparing two or more things? For comparisons over time,
    use a line chart or a time series plot.


    For these types of charts, an option is available
    for adding an overview axis to the chart. The overview axis is a scrolling axis that enables
    you to specify how much of the axis appears and which segment of the axis appears. These can make
    it easier to focus on specific time periods in the chart. Be aware that screen readers cannot
    interact with the overview axis. If you need to include an overview axis, include a second object,
    like a list table or cross tab, that presents the same information in an accessible way or
    direct users to the details table that is displayed when the object is maximized.


    For line charts or time series plots that include groups, multiple lines are displayed on the plot.
    Visual analytics includes support for line patterns to distinguish between lines in a line chart.
    Users can turn on line patterns by setting the high contrast report theme override setting for
    the report. Report authors do not need to do anything to make this setting available to users,
    but it is a best practice to include a note that specifies how to override the theme with the high
    contrast report theme.


    Am I comparing two or more things? For comparing against a benchmark,
    add reference lines or display rules, use a needle plot, use a bullet gauge for its simplicity,
    or create a targeted bar chart.


    Some objects, like gauges, use a gradient for colors. Avoid
    three color gradients, that is, gradients that vary from one color at one end of a range,
    to a second color in the middle of the range, to a third color at the opposite end of a range.
    Three color gradients are generally not accessible to people with color deficient vision. Instead,
    use two color gradients and choose starting and ending colors with a sufficient difference
    in luminosity. It's a best practice to use the default colors or choose colors that appear in
    the same vertical column in the standard list of colors. Each color in a column has a different
    luminosity and can be distinguished by people with color blindness. You can test the gradient
    by turning your display to grayscale mode or by printing the report in grayscale.



    Am I showing survey or questionnaire results? If so, you can use a stacked bar chart to compare
    Likert responses, like never, occasionally, sometimes, often, or always, a vertical bar chart
    or column bar chart, for all that apply questions or a table or crosstab if the viewer needs to
    compare specific data values or precise numeric values are needed. Box plots can also be useful
    to show the average response, the minimum and maximum values and outliers. However, many people
    are unfamiliar with box plots, so it might be helpful to provide an explanation.

 
     For bar charts
     that contain groups, different colors are used for each group. Visual analytics includes support
     for fill patterns to distinguish between groups in a bar chart. Users can turn on fill patterns
     by setting the high contrast report theme override setting for the report. Report authors do not need
     to do anything to make this setting available to users, but it is a best practice to include a note
     that specifies how to override the theme with the high contrast report theme. In addition,
     it's a best practice to avoid adding display rules to objects that use color to distinguish
     between groups, like grouped bar charts. The display rule overrides the fill pattern,
     which might make it difficult for viewers to distinguish the elements.
 

    Am I describing how the parts relate to the whole? If so, use a donut chart or a pie chart
    if comparing only four or five data points, a stacked bar chart, a histogram to show ranges
    and intervals, a tree map or a geomap when location is an important part of the analysis.


    Pie charts should be used only to compare a few groups, five or fewer. Pie charts are popular,
    but be aware that it is very hard to compare the relative sizes of slices in the chart.
    In addition, changes over time are difficult to detect, and pie charts take up more space
    than any other types of charts, like bar charts and tree maps. Because of this, pie charts should
    be used sparingly and only in special circumstances. Specifically, you can use a pie chart to illustrate
    that one value makes up the majority as seen in this pie chart, which might be difficult to detect
    in a bar chart.

 
     Donut charts are similar to pie charts but have a hole in the center that can
     display an abbreviated total. This hole makes it easier to compare relative sizes because it forces
     the viewer to focus on reading the lengths of the arcs rather than the proportions of the slices.
     Be aware that when the donut chart includes a donut hole label, as seen in this donut chart,
     the label is not accessible to screen readers in the Visual Analytics web application.
     If you use this type of label to convey information to your viewers,
     you should include the same data in an alternative way, like with a text object or a list table.
 

    It's best to use pie charts and donut charts sparingly or not at all. In most cases, you can
    display the same information more clearly in a bar chart. Don't take it from me, though. Here's
    what the visualization experts have to say about pie charts.

 
     Geomaps can be used when location is
     an important part of the analysis, but they can be difficult for many users to interpret.
     Consider supplementing geomaps with more easily understood objects,
     like list tables or cross tabs. In addition, be aware that text labels for place names might
     have insufficient contrast against the background map. To improve accessibility, use the automatic
     map background, which updates to a high contrast map when the high contrast report theme is used,
     or use the open street map high contrast background.
 
 
     Am I showing the relationship
     between data items? If so, use a scatter plot or a heat map to show the relationship between two
     variables, a bubble plot to show the relationship between three variables, or a correlation matrix
     to show the linear relationship between many measures. For readers using screen reader
     technology, it's a best practice to limit digits displayed after decimal points unless it's required
     for precision.
 
 
     Am I showing the relationship between data items? You can use a network diagram
     to show many relationships, a path analysis to show processes, or a text object to add
     a detailed description when no visual is possible. For example, if you want to display numbered
     lists or bullets, when using these types of charts, it's especially important to ensure that
     legends are displayed on all screen sizes. If legends are not displayed on the chart,
     they can be viewed only when the user activates the collapsed button. The button does not have
     an accessible name or role, so it is not useful for screen readers.
 
 
     Is a graph required? In some
     cases, word clouds, images, or illustrations created with the data-driven content object
     might better communicate the point. In addition, text can be used to give context to the value or
     state the conclusions that can be drawn from the data. When using text, avoid using sensory
     characteristics like the size of the object, the shape of the item, or the position on the screen
     as the sole means of conveying information or identifying a portion of the report.
     This can make it difficult for screen reader users to navigate the report.
 

    Word clouds can be used to easily identify commonalities or common values in your data.
    However, word clouds should be avoided if analytical accuracy is desired because the
    size and position of the word can impact the attention placed on the word.
    Typically, users find word clouds easier to comprehend if you limit the number of words
    displayed. This can be done with the word display limit option. Avoid using the color
    role in the word cloud. Assigning a measure to this role can produce low-contrast text that is
    difficult to read.


    The image object can be used to include graphics in your report,
    like the corporate logo, diagrams, or a background image. When you use an image,
    it's a best practice to specify alternative text to identify the image object for screen reader
    users. If the image is complex and needs more than a brief sentence to describe,
    consider placing a text object next to the image and add text that conveys equivalent
    information for these users.


    The text object is a useful way to provide context or to state the
    conclusions that can be drawn from the data. Be aware that screen readers cannot perceive
    text formatting, like font, text size, foreground color, background color, weight, italic,
    underlining, or justification. Avoid using text formatting, including text color,
    to convey meaning unless you also describe it in the text itself.

=== Choose the Best Control 206 ===
When adding prompts to your report, you need to select the best control for your data.
    One option is to use auto controls. Auto controls can be created by dragging data items to the
    report or page prompt area. Visual Analytics chooses the appropriate control based on the type,
    category, date, time, or measure, and the cardinality of the data item. If you drag a
    hierarchy to the report or page prompt area, the auto control chooses the best control object for
    each level of the hierarchy, and automatic filters are added to create cascading controls.


    Alternatively, you can select your own control object. When selecting control objects,
    you need to consider the type and cardinality of the data item.
    For date and measure data items, a slider control should be used. This control enables a viewer to
    move a selector horizontally or vertically to select a single value or a range of values.
    For category data items, the control that you use depends on whether you want the viewer to
    select multiple values or a single value. To select multiple values, a list control should be used.
    This control enables a viewer to select one or more category values from a list.
    The list control can be used only in the report and page prompt areas inside a prompt container
    or when the report and page prompt areas are on the left or right of the canvas.


    To select a single value, you also need to consider the cardinality. Remember that the
    cardinality measures the number of distinct values for a category data item. Categories
    with few distinct values, that is, fewer than five, can be used with a button bar. A button
    bar displays buttons in a vertical or horizontal layout. Categories with a moderate number of
    distinct values, between five and 40, can be used with a drop-down list. Categories with many
    distinct values, that is, more than 40, can be used with a text input control. A text input
    control enables a viewer to enter text in a field. As text is entered, the list of available values
    is filtered.

=== Consider the Layout 804 ===
Remember that the goal of reporting is to tell a single data story.
    In the next step, consider the layout.
    You need to arrange the pages and objects in the optimal way to convey your message.
    Keep these best practices in mind.
    Limit the number of data sources, pages, and objects.
    Make more important objects larger.
    Consider the placement of objects.
    Arrange objects with actions in a logical order.
    Use negative space.
    And use the default grid layout or containers.


    Limit the number of data sources used in the report.
    Recall that each report can use data that exists in multiple tables.
    Although there are no specific limits to the number of data sources that can be used in a report,
    as a best practice, each report should use three or fewer data sources.
    This will keep your report from covering too many topics.
    Limiting the number of data sources used in the report can also improve the performance of the report.
    If you need to use more than six data sources to tell your data story,
    consider combining data sources in the data preparation phase.
    Although this can be done in visual analytics by creating an aggregated data source or a data source join,
    it's recommended that you prepare your data before using it in the report,
    for example, by writing code in SAS Studio.


    Limit the number of pages used in a report.
    There are no technical limitations to the number of pages that can be added to a report.
    However, if you need more than six or seven pages to tell your story,
    consider breaking the story into multiple reports.
    Using fewer pages makes the report seem less complex
    and makes it easier for the user to remember the content presented on each page.
    Limiting the number of pages can also help with the performance of the report,
    especially if the report is viewed on a mobile device.
    Arrange pages in a logical order that will advance the data story.
    Also, consider adding a table of contents with links to each page for easy navigation
    or adding an introductory page with useful information,
    like the company logo, the update schedule, contact information, or a summary of the report.
    You can also use page links to control the navigation of the report
    or to provide additional details with pop-up pages.
    This will reduce the chance of overwhelming users with details
    and can also help with accessibility by giving viewers an alternative view of the data.


    Limit the number of objects on each page.
    Although there are no physical limits to the number of objects that can be added to each page,
    it's a best practice to use between two and six objects per page.
    This enables the user to focus on the data and can improve comprehension.


    Make more important objects larger.
    You can enhance visibility by making more important objects larger and less important objects smaller.
    The larger the graph or chart, the more time that the audience spends studying it.
    In this example, the geomap takes up almost 75% of the screen,
    and the key value objects share 25%.
    When accessing this report, the viewer will spend more time looking at the geomap
    and use the key value objects for additional information.
    Once you have created pages that meet your specifications,
    you can save them as a page template and reuse them in other reports.
    This helps speed up development time in the future.


    Consider the placement of objects.
    Placing an object in the center of the page or in the top left corner can create a focal point.
    However, this placement might change depending on the location of the audience.
    In the example on the left, the needle plot is placed in the center of the page, near the top.
    As a consequence, the viewer views that chart first and uses the other objects for supplemental information.
    Also be aware that objects that are side-by-side or on the same row or column are intuitively understood to be related.
    In addition, you should arrange objects so that different pieces of related data are next to each other for easy comparison
    and not far apart.
    In the example on the right, all objects related to South America are in one column,
    and all objects related to Europe are in a second column.
    In addition, rows are created to hold the key value objects and the bar charts
    so that they are easily compared across continents.


    Arrange objects with actions in a logical order.
    The source object should be placed in the upper left corner
    and the target objects should be placed to the right of and below the source object.
    In this example, the list control in the upper left corner is the source object.
    When the viewer selects a continent, the geomap in the upper right corner is filtered.
    Then when the viewer selects a country in the geomap, both the bar chart in the lower left corner
    and the list table in the lower right corner are filtered.
    Lastly, when the viewer selects a bar in the bar chart,
    the associated row in the list table is highlighted with a linked selection action.
    Recall that the linked selection action will work in both ways,
    the viewer can select a row in the list table and highlight the associated bar in the bar chart.
    Notice how objects are arranged to match the path of actions from left to right, top to bottom.
    Be aware that this arrangement will change for cultures that read from right to left.


    Use negative space.
    Negative space can be used to increase comprehension and enable easier navigation of the report.
    It also makes for a more visually appealing and elegant report.
    Increase negative space, avoid borders and use margins and padding, but remember to be consistent.
    In the example on the right, padding is reduced and objects are overlapping.
    This makes for a report that appears too cluttered and can overwhelm the audience.
    The example on the left contains the same information but uses default padding.
    This report exudes a more relaxed impression, and it's much less likely that viewers will miss important details.
    In addition, be aware that larger amounts of padding can crowd report content when users view the report on small screens or with zoom set above 100%.
    If you modify the amount of padding, ensure that you test the report thoroughly.
    Too small padding can cause the keyboard focus indicator to appear oddly or not at all.
    If you change the amount of padding from the default, test the report on smaller screens or with a higher zoom.
    In addition, test the report as a keyboard user to ensure that report content is still usable and keyboard focus indicators are still visible.


    Use the default grid layout or containers.
    The default grid layout and the standard container enable you to place objects directly next to other objects without overlap.
    All objects are sized to fill the user's screen.
    You can easily resize objects using the 4x8 grid.
    For greater accuracy, you can press and hold the control key to increase the resolution of the grid.


    Alternatively, you can use containers to group objects.
    The prompt container can be used to organize multiple prompts and can be beneficial to mobile device users by enabling easier navigation.
    The scrolling container enables you to create a report that functions like a web page.
    You can add more information and graphs can be larger, which can improve the viewing experience on a mobile device.
    This layout also enables more clarification of objects because it enables you to add text to describe the object or text that includes additional information.


    The stacking container can be used to group related objects.
    The stacking container can also add an alternative way to view the same information in different ways, like by including a table or a more mainstream chart.
    This helps with accessibility, especially for users who use screen reader technology.


    You can also use precision containers to create a report with overlapping objects, like to add a background image to the report.
    Be aware that precision containers can cause problems when reports are viewed on different screen sizes.
    If you want to use them, it's recommended that you use the report level option set fixed report size to specify a fixed size of the report.
    However, if you use this option, be sure to test thoroughly on multiple devices and screen sizes.

=== Draft a Plan 325 ===
When drafting a plan, you need to, one, select your data, two, know your audience, three,
    craft your story, and four, sketch your design.


    You'll start by selecting your data.
    This data can be stored in any format, SAS data sets, Microsoft Excel files, database
    tables, text files, and can even exist in multiple tables.
    You can combine the tables before using them in Visual Analytics, or you can use multiple
    data sources in your report.
    The update frequency of the data sources that you choose determine how often the report
    is updated.
    As a best practice, we recommend that you prepare your data before using it in Visual
    Analytics, for example, by writing code in SAS Studio.
    You can also create a variety of data items in Visual Analytics using one-click calculations,
    like the difference from the previous period or distinct count, hierarchies that enable
    you to view different levels of the data, geography data items for mapping, parameters,
    to enable dynamic control by the report viewer, and statistical data items like interaction
    effects, spline effects, and partitions.


    Then you need to determine the audience for your report.
    The needs and interests of your audience determine what you present, how you present it, and
    what level of detail you include.


    Suppose you are building a report for statisticians.
    You might use models and advanced analytics in the report, like the automated explanation,
    automated prediction, forecasting, network analysis, path analysis, and text topics.
    For this audience, those models will be self-explanatory, and you might not have to include a lot of
    detail about how the model works, the purpose of the model, and why it's useful for the
    report.
    On the other hand, if you are building a report for a general audience, you might want to
    use simpler graphs that are easier to interpret and understand.
    In addition, you might want to include additional instructions and explanatory text to explain
    the purpose and usefulness of the report.


    Your audience will also give you a good idea about whether you want to enable the viewer
    to modify pieces of the report, like modifying simple options and sorting, changing the report
    object, or changing the data used in the report.
    You can control their level of modification by setting the customization level for the
    report.


    You also need to start crafting your data story.
    Your reports should focus on telling a single data story.
    When you begin to craft your story, think about these questions.
    Are you trying to persuade your audience?
    Are you presenting facts?
    Do you want the audience to act?
    Storytelling helps your audience feel connected to your report by eliciting emotion and triggering
    memory.
    This makes it more likely that they will remember what the report has to say and will
    act on those findings.


    Finally, you should do a rough sketch of the design of the report.
    This can be an outline of the report, a table of contents, or a draft of each page, which
    includes a rough layout, the types of objects that will be used, and how each page contributes
    to your overall data story.
    You should always keep the story in mind when building your report.
    In this stage, you should also start planning for accessibility.
    For example, you can plan to add a table representation for each graph to better enable viewers to
    see specific values.

=== Focus on Whats Important 510 ===
In the next step, focus on what's important, you need to make sure that your report is
    compelling and interactive and that it enables viewers to find the information that is important
    to them when they need it.
    This means that you need to create reports that are well organized, easy to navigate,
    versatile, and attractive.


    You can organize content by adding multiple pages to your reports.
    Each page in your report should focus on one aspect of the story and tell that piece with
    a limited number of objects.
    Not only that, but you must ensure that each page can stand on its own.
    Viewers should not be expected to remember details from one page to understand the concepts
    that are communicated on another page.
    In addition to adding multiple pages to your report, you can create pages that provide
    additional details to report viewers, hidden pages, and pop-up pages.
    These pages can be used to communicate details about the report to other designers, or they
    can be linked to from an object on a regular page to enable viewers to see additional details.
    There is no limit to the number of pages that can be added to a report or the number of
    objects that can be added to a page.
    However, it is a good idea to limit the number of pages to make your report easier to access,
    easier to navigate, and easier to understand.
    If you need more than six or seven visible pages to tell your data story, you should
    consider creating multiple reports and use links between them to provide additional information.



    You can make your reports easy to navigate by adding descriptions to define the purpose
    of your report and instructions to describe the features of the report.
    Use clear, detailed titles that help your audience understand the purpose of the object,
    and use text to add additional details and numbers when needed.
    Add a table of contents or an introductory page to help explain the basics of the report.
    You can even use pop-up pages to provide more information about navigating the page,
    like detailed tips on how to use each page, descriptions of report objects, and information
    about actions and links.
    This information can be communicated with a text object or even a video.
    Including detailed descriptions and instructions can help make the report more accessible and
    is critical for any users who will interact with the report using screen reader technology.
    Adding text to explain report actions will enable screen readers and sighted users to
    better understand the structure of the report.
    When adding text in titles or instructions, or for explanations, it's a best practice
    to use consistent fonts.


    You can make your reports versatile or interactive by adding animations, ranks, prompts, actions,
    and links, and by setting viewer capabilities.


    Animations can enable your users to view changes in data over time.
    When using animations, be sure to focus on changes that are different from the norm.
    Ranks enable users to focus on the most important values and can be used to identify leaders,
    top values, or lagers, bottom values.
    Report and page prompts can be used to help the viewer focus on areas that are important
    to them by filtering the report and page, respectively.
    Consider the placement of prompts because you don't want them to be overlooked and
    use titles to explain their purpose, how to use the prompt, and which elements are
    affected.


    Actions can add interactivity to the report so that users can explore data in a way that
    is meaningful to them.
    This involves them in the data discovery process and increases their motivation to act on their
    findings.
    Using automatic actions enables users to customize their experience by specifying the order in
    which their actions are applied, making the report more dynamic and valuable.
    Automatic actions can also be a useful way to speed up development.
    Links can be used to provide additional information.
    Be sure to add instructions to explain which links are available and how they work.
    For example, whether they filter the target data.
    Viewer capabilities enables you to give users more control over the appearance of the report
    by modifying options, changing chart types, or selecting the data.


    Finally, you can add styles and display rules to make your reports more attractive.
    Styles can be modified at the report level, at the page level, and at the object level.
    You can specify the background color, the font, the colors for objects, like fill, lines,
    markers, and gradient, the data skin, and you can add padding and borders.
    However you choose to modify styles, be consistent.
    Using too many different styles detracts from the message of your report.
    Display rules can be used to highlight important values.
    Be sure to choose colors that are easily distinguished, especially for users who are
    color blind.


    When working with colors, be cognizant of color choices.
    The choice of color can affect the mood and the viewer's reaction to a report object.
    Colors can evoke both positive and negative emotions.
    For each color choice shown, the words on the left list the positive associations with
    that color, and the words on the right list the negative associations with that color.
    Be aware that your color choices might change for different localities or regions.

=== Lesson Overview 038 ===
To enable viewers to find the information that is important to them, you need to create compelling, interactive reports. You can do this by designing a report that is both visually appealing and easy to understand. For more information about how to create effective reports, including examples, guidelines, and references, visit www.sas.com/beautifulreports.
To create an impactful report, follow these steps: (1) draft a plan, (2) choose the best chart, (3) focus on what's important, (4) consider the layout, and (5) test, test, and test again.

=== Test Test and Test Again 535 ===
In the final step, test, test and test again, you evaluate the performance and accessibility
    of the report, solicit feedback from colleagues, test the report on multiple devices, screen
    sizes and presentations, and view the report using different languages.


    You can use the report review pane to evaluate the performance and accessibility of your
    report.


    Any issues that are identified include a description and suggestions for improvement, and they
    are categorized into high, medium, or low severity.
    For some suggestions, like unused data sources, object names, and unused data items, you can
    click the More button to perform additional actions on the issue.
    For example, if the report contains an unused data source, you can use this menu to delete
    the data source.


    If performance is an issue, consider reducing the number of pages in the report, reducing
    the number of objects on a page, reducing the number of controls in the report or page
    prompt areas, using fewer data sources, decreased usage of nested containers, pre-aggregating
    or joining your data, removing unnecessary data items in the data preparation phase,
    or pre-filtering the data.
    These performance improvements can be especially useful for users who view the report on a
    mobile device.


    For accessibility, limit the use of animation, color-dependent display rules, lattices, linked
    selection actions, and overview axes.
    In addition, for screen reader users, provide meaningful names or titles for objects or
    specify alternative text.


    In addition to viewing issues on the Report Review pane, you can use the Report Review
    menu button to create a PDF of a list of all issues analyzed, whether the report passed
    each check, a list of priorities for issues detected, and recommendations for improvement.
    For more information about the issues and thresholds, see the Report Review pane reference
    in the SAS Visual Analytics documentation.


    In addition to using the Report Review pane to analyze the performance of a report, you
    can also use an internal diagnostic tool to troubleshoot report data issues.
    When editing the report, press Ctrl plus Alt plus Q to access the Query Diagnostics window.
    From this window, you can select an individual object from the report and execute the query
    to check its run time.
    This can help you pinpoint long-running queries, like those that include calculated items,
    and might point toward possible solutions.
    For example, if an object that uses calculated items has a long-running query, you might
    be able to increase report performance by calculating the data items during the data
    preparation phase.


    To improve the performance of your reports, heat these best practices in mind.
    Reduce the usage of complex filters.
    You can do this by moving static filters to the data preparation phase.
    Do not create reports that use too many data sources.
    If your reports need more than six data sources, consider joining the tables in the data preparation
    phase.
    Limit the number of objects per page.
    In general, each page should use fewer than six objects.
    Consider breaking these pages into multiple pages and using links to move between them.
    Limit the use of complex calculations.
    Some calculations can be moved to the data preparation phase.


    Then, ask colleagues for feedback on your report.
    Ask them the following questions.
    What is the story?
    Is the report easy to navigate?
    Did you get lost?
    Did all the actions work?
    Were all the features of the report apparent?
    Use their feedback to make your report even better than it was before.


    Finally, test your report on various devices and screen sizes.
    You can do this using the developer tools for your browser and clicking the toggle device
    toolbar button.
    This enables you to view and navigate the report using different devices and different
    screen sizes.
    This is especially important if the precision container was used in the report because the
    objects can look different on different screens.


    You should also perform other tests, depending on how your report will be used.
    For example, you should create a PDF of the report if the report will be shared via report
    distribution.
    You can also perform a test print of the report if users will be printing hard copies.
    When doing this, print the report in grayscale to check that users with low vision or color
    blindness can identify color differences.
    You can also project the report to ensure that the colors show up and have sufficient
    contrast.
    View the report using the SAS Viya SDK for JavaScript if report content will be embedded
    in a custom webpage.
    Test the report from SAS for Microsoft 365 and play the report if it will be presented
    in a kiosk or as a slideshow.


    To set up report playback, view the report, click the report toolbar and select edit playback.
    Options are available to hide the report control area, page tabs, and page report area, show
    canvas only, to show a timer for each page, show timer, and to show navigation controls
    for the report playback, show navigation controls upon click or touch.


    You should also test the report when the application colors are inverted, using control plus grave,
    and when the viewer chooses to override the theme with the high contrast report theme
    as users can use this option to view the report at higher contrast.
    In addition, if the report has been localized, you might want to view the report using browsers
    with different locales.
    If you choose to localize reports, make sure to localize all available text.
    This helps avoid problems with mixed language content.

